BIS Working Papers 
No 1120 

Energy shocks as Keynesian 
supply shocks: implications for 
fiscal policy 

by Enisse Kharroubi and Frank Smets 

Monetary and Economic Department 

September 2023 

JEL classification: D31, E21, E32, E62, H3. 

Keywords:  energy  shocks,  non-homothetic  demand, 
heterogeneous households, fiscal policy, public debt. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIS  Working  Papers  are  written  by  members  of  the  Monetary  and  Economic 
Department of the Bank for International Settlements, and from time to time by other 
economists,  and  are  published  by  the  Bank.  The  papers  are  on  subjects  of  topical 
interest and are technical in character. The views expressed in them are those of their 
authors and not necessarily the views of the BIS. 

This publication is available on the BIS website (www.bis.org). 

©  Bank for International Settlements 2023. All rights reserved. Brief excerpts may be 

reproduced or translated provided the source is stated. 

ISSN 1020-0959 (print) 
ISSN 1682-7678 (online) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Energy Shocks as Keynesian Supply shocks:

Implications for Fiscal Policy*

Enisse Kharroubi†

and

Frank Smets‡

Abstract

This paper analyses the economic impact of and the optimal policy response to

energy supply shocks in a flexible price model with heterogeneous households. We

introduce energy as a consumption good on the demand side and as an input to pro-

duction on the supply side. A distinguishing feature is that, in line with empirical

evidence, we allow households’ energy demand to be non-homothetic. The model

provides three main insights. First, (negative) energy supply shocks act as a (negative)

demand shock, or Keynesian supply shock, when three conditions are met: (i) house-

hold income heterogeneity is intermediate, neither too high nor too low; (ii) the fraction

of poor and credit-constrained households is high and (iii) competition between firms

is strong enough. Second, implementing the first-best allocation requires subsidising

the poor and taxing the rich, and more so when the economy faces a negative energy

shock. Last, issuing public debt can be part of the optimal policy response to a negative

energy shock, if the shock is large and the economy’s overall energy intensity is low.

Keywords: Energy shocks, non-homothetic demand, heterogeneous households, fiscal

policy, public debt.

JEL Classification codes: D31, E21, E32, E62, H3.

*Corresponding author’s email: enisse.kharroubi@bis.org. The views expressed here do not necessarily
represent the views of the BIS or the ECB. The paper benefited from comments from participants at the BIS-
SNB Research Workshop, the CEPR conference on Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy in Times of Turmoil
and the ETH-University of Oxford Macro-Finance conference. The paper was written while Frank Smets
was visiting the BIS, as a Lamfallussy Research Fellow.

†Bank for International Settlements
‡European Central Bank, Ghent University and Bank for International Settlements

1

1

Introduction

The recent energy crisis has elicited much debate about its distributional and macroe-

conomic consequences and the appropriate fiscal (and monetary) policy response. One

feature that has been highlighted is the negative impact of higher energy prices on the

distribution of income and consumption. Poorer households typically spend a larger share

of their income on energy (see Figure 1).1 As a result, they experience a stronger decline

in their real disposable income following negative energy shocks. Moreover, as these

Figure 1: Poor households spend more on energy.

households often have low saving buffers and are typically credit constrained, they tend

to adjust their non-energy consumption much more than richer households in response

to an adverse energy shock. Accordingly, the fiscal policy debate has focused on the need

to target income support (in the form of subsidies or tax rebates) to the most vulnera-

ble households. This can alleviate the negative distributional consequences and support

aggregate demand, while limiting the fiscal cost.2

In this paper we develop a flexible price model with heterogeneous households and

non-homothetic demand for energy to investigate the economic impact of and the optimal

fiscal policy response to energy supply shocks. Like previous papers in the literature, we

introduce energy as a consumption good on the demand side and as an input to production

on the supply side.3 In addition, our framework carries two distinguishing features. One

1This evidence, based on Eurostat Household Budget Survey, also shows that the difference between

between the rich and the poor in the energy share in consumption has been growing over time.

2See, for instance, Ari et al. (2022) for a review of policy initiatives meant to alleviate the fallout of the

energy crisis.

3see Kim and Loungani (1992), Hunt (2005), Bodenstein et al. (2008) or Dhawan and Jeske (2008) for a

similar modelling.

2

is that households need to consume a minimum amount of energy.4 As a result, as income

rises, the energy share in total expenditure falls. Second, households are heterogeneous

in their income as well as in their ability to tap credit markets. As a consequence, the

minimum energy consumption barely matters for high-income households. Conversely

for low-income households, the minimum energy consumption may become binding,

especially when negative income shocks hit.

In this environment, a negative energy supply shock typically has a larger impact on

the ability of low-income, credit-constrained households to consume non-energy goods.5

We trace out the implications of this feature for the aggregate economy and the policy

response and provide three main insights. First, in this environment, (negative) energy

supply shocks can act as (negative) demand shocks, or Keynesian supply shocks, in

particular when three conditions are met: the dispersion in household incomes is neither

too high nor too low; the fraction of poor, credit-constrained households is large; the

elasticity of substitution between non-energy goods is high. Second, implementing the

first-best allocation requires subsidising the poor and taxing the rich, and the more so —
relative to incomes— when the economy suffers a negative energy shock. Finally, issuing

public debt can be part of the optimal policy response, particularly when the economy
faces a large shock, and/or when the economy’ overall energy intensity is low.

The literature on the economic effects of energy shocks is large (see for instance Kilian

(2008) for a survey). The distributional consequences and the optimal policy response

are, however, less well explored. Our paper contributes to a recent literature focusing

on this angle. First, several empirical papers document the distributional consequences

of energy price shocks. Battistini et al. (2022), Gelman et al. (2023) and K¨anzig (2021)
show that low-income and/or liquidity-constrained households adjust their non-energy

expenditures to energy price shocks to a larger extent. Similarly, Peersman and Wauters

(2022) show, using Belgian survey data, that non-energy consumption is more sensitive to

energy price increases than to energy price decreases. Marginal propensities to consume

4We follow here Geary (1950) and Stone (1954) in assuming that household derive utility from energy

consumption only when it exceeds a certain minimum amount.

5Motivated by the recent European experience, Gornemann et al. (2023) also consider energy shocks as

reductions in the available quantity of energy, and how such shocks can create self-fulfilling fluctuations.

3

(MPCs) are also significantly larger for low-income and low-saving buffer households,

while non-energy consumption declines more strongly for households who report higher

uncertainty on their future financial situation. Our paper embeds these empirical findings

in a two-agent macroeconomic model.

Second, a burgeoning literature uses TANK and HANK models to explore the distribu-

tional and macroeconomic implications of energy price shocks. Chan et al. (2022) develop

a small, open-economy TANK model, where labor and energy complement each other.

In this framework, higher energy prices typically reduce the labor share in total income,

which depressed aggregate demand, because of borrowing constraints.

In turn, price

flexibility insures firm profits against adverse energy price shocks and further depresses

labor income and demand. Pieroni (2023) and Auclert et al. (2023) develop a full-scale

HANK model to address similar questions. Auclert et al. (2023) focuses on the open econ-

omy implications of alternative monetary and fiscal policy responses. They show that an

increase in imported energy prices can cause a recession by pushing down real wages and

consumer spending, provided the elasticity of substitution between energy and domestic

goods is realistically low. They also analyse the cross-border impact of alternative mone-
tary and fiscal policies. Our paper also emphasises the possible negative demand effects

of an energy supply shock, but our mechanism does not rely on a limited substitutability

on the supply side. Instead we emphasise the empirically relevant non-homothetic en-

ergy demand on the household side and the implications for MPCs of credit-constrained

households. We also characterise optimal fiscal policy in this environment.

Specifically, we investigate three questions. First, what are the implications of a neg-

ative energy supply shock? Second, which distortions, if any, does the market allocation
suffer from? Third, what tools can the social planner use to correct these distortions, and

in particular, is there a role for public debt?

On the first question, a negative energy supply shock which makes energy more scarce,

typically makes the economy as a whole poorer, as households and firms need energy for

consumption and production. Aggregate output, aggregate consumption and real wages

therefore all fall. Yet, households’ demand for energy being non-homothetic, low-income,

credit-constrained households have to cut significantly their demand for consumption

4

goods, as (some of) their demand for energy is sticky and does not respond to changes

in relative prices. As a result, aggregate demand for consumption goods falls more than

one-to-one, the relative price of consumption goods drops and high-income households
end up better-off as the drop in the relative price of consumption goods dominates the

drop in income due to the direct impact of the negative energy supply shock. As high-

income households can freely borrow and lend, a temporary negative energy supply shock

typically leads to a drop in the equilibrium rate of interest.

Negative energy shocks can act as Keynesian supply shocks when the pecuniary ex-
ternality affecting the price of consumption goods, is large relative to the negative income
effect due to adverse energy shocks. This happens when three conditions are met. First,

household income heterogeneity needs to be neither too low nor too high. When income

heterogeneity is low, consumption patterns are similar across households, and the price

externality is weak, while with high income heterogeneity, low-income households do not

purchase consumption goods in the first place. So, there can be no externality. Second, the

demand for consumption goods needs to drop significantly following a negative energy

shock, i.e. there needs to be enough low-income, credit-constrained households. Third,
the price of consumption goods needs to be sufficiently responsive to the fall in demand,
i.e. competition between firms producing consumption goods needs to be sufficiently

large. Hence unlike other theories of Keynesian supply shocks looking at asymmetric

shocks in the context of low elasticity of substitution between consumption goods (Guer-

rieri et al. (2022)), we highlight the role of inelastic demand for some goods like energy.

Such inelastic demand can lead to a disproportionate reduction in the demand for other

goods, paving the way for Keynesian supply shocks.

In our model, the decentralised equilibrium suffers two distortions. First, because

of monopolistic competition, firms do not consume enough energy. Second, because

households are heterogeneous, some consume too much (energy and consumption goods)

while others consume too little. Putting these two distortions together, households, as a

group, do not consume enough energy at the equilibrium when dispersion in household

incomes is large. Conversely, firms do not consume enough energy at the equilibrium

when dispersion in household incomes is low.

5

Looking into the normative analysis, the social planner can implement the first-best al-

location, by subsidising low-income households —to ensure they can cover their inelastic

demand for energy— and firms’ energy consumption, to address the monopolistic compe-

tition distortion. Last but not least, the social planner needs to raise taxes on high-income

households, to equalise MPCs across households and ensure a balanced budget.

The first-best allocation features two important properties. First, negative energy

shocks always act as standard negative supply shocks and raise the equilibrium rate

of interest, at the first-best. By equalising incomes across households, the social planner

precludes any price externality resulting from some households disproportionately cutting

consumption in response to negative energy shocks. Second, negative energy shocks

require proportionally larger transfers to low-income households. This is because negative

energy shocks typically hurt low-income households twice, as labour income falls and as

a larger fraction of income is devoted to energy consumption. Implementing the first-best

therefore requires to tax a larger fraction of rich households’ income, the larger the negative

energy shock.

In this context, there can be a role for public debt in implementing the social optimum.

In principle, there should not be any. Under the first-best allocation, there is no shortage

of demand, as negative energy supply shocks always raise the equilibrium rate. However,

under balanced budget, implementing the first best allocation is possible, only insofar as

tax rates can be set arbitrarily high. Yet if there is an upper bound on tax rates, as is likely in

practise, large negative energy shocks may require taxing high-income households beyond

what is feasible. Issuing public debt can then bypass this problem. In doing so, the social

planner must still ensure that future tax revenues, which are themselves bounded by

maximum feasible taxation, are enough to service the debt and implement the first-best

allocation once the economy is back to the steady state. Summarising these constraints, we

derive a ”fiscal space” statistics, which computes the upper bound on the energy shock for

which the social planner can implement the first-best allocation, using public debt, while

ensuring it is sustainable. We then show that, provided the social planner can implement

the first-best at the steady state, ”fiscal space” is strictly positive. In addition, it is larger,

in economies where energy-intensity is lower, i.e. where the share of energy in output

6

and consumption is lower, and/or also in economies where household inter-temporal

elasticity of substitution is higher. Conversely ”fiscal space” is smaller in economies
where household income dispersion is larger, and/or in economies where public debt is

higher to start with, these correlations being magnified in low energy-intensive economies.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section lays out the main build-

ing blocks of the model. Section 3 derives the decentralised equilibrium and its main

properties. The social optimum, its implementation and the implications for public debt

issuance, are analysed in section 4. Finally conclusions are drawn in section 5.

7

2 The model

The model consists of households and firms. Households are heterogeneous, they supply

labour to firms and consume goods that firms produce under monopolistic competition.6

Moreover, households consume energy (in addition to consumption goods) while firms

use energy as an input to production (in addition to labour). Importantly, the demand for

energy on the household side will be non-homothetic. Let us now describe the model’s

main assumptions more systematically, starting with households and following with firms.

2.1 The demand side

2.1.1 Household preferences

Households live indefinitely. Each period, they consume energy E and a composite con-

sumption good C. In addition they are endowed each period with some quantity of energy

and some quantity of labour —the latter is normalised to one for simplicity. Households’

preferences U write as:

with

u (Et; Ct) =

(cid:20)
δ

U =

(cid:88)

t

βt [u (Et; Ct)]1− 1
1 − 1
γ

γ − 1

1
σ
h

h (Et − eh)1− 1

σ

h + (1 − δh)

1
σ

h (Ct)1− 1

σ
h

(cid:21) 1
1− 1σ
h

if Et ≥ eh

(1)

(2)

Here γ denotes households’ inter-temporal elasticity of substitution, σh denotes house-

holds’ (intra-temporal) elasticity of substitution between energy and consumption goods
and β is the rate at which households discount the future. Following Geary (1950) and

Stone (1954), we introduce a minimum (subsistence) consumption level —denoted eh— for

energy, which acts as a lower bound on households’ demand for energy. Accordingly, en-
ergy consumption Et carries an infinite marginal utility whenever Et ≤ eh, making energy

demand up to eh inelastic to prices. Households therefore first devote their income to en-
ergy consumption up to Et = eh and then split whatever income is left between energy and

6We restrict heterogeneity to the household side, while firms are assumed to be symmetric. Introducing
heterogeneity on the firm side would add further mechanism in the model, not least in terms of reallocation
across firms and sectors, that we leave out this paper.

8

consumption goods, the share of energy in household expenditures being then δh.7 The

composite consumption good C, is in turn, a standard CES aggregation of consumption
goods s produced across the different sectors in the economy:

Ct =

(cid:34)(cid:90) 1

0

(cid:35) 1
1− 1η

[cst]1− 1

η ds

(3)

Here η > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between the different consumption goods.

Denoting pet the price of energy at time t and pst the price of the consumption good s at

time t, the price of the composite consumption good pct and the general price level Pt

—assuming energy consumption E exceeds the minimal level eh— respectively satisfy:

p1−η

ct

=

(cid:90) 1

0

p1−η
st ds and P1−σ

t

h

= δhp1−σ

et

h

+ (1 − δh) p1−σ

ct

h

(4)

2.1.2 Household demand for energy and consumption goods

Let us denote Rt, the nominal income net of the cost of minimum energy consumption,

that a household devotes to purchases of energy and consumption goods. Household

demands for energy and for the composite consumption good, respectively write as:

Et = eh +

R−
t
pet

+ δh

(cid:20) pet
Pt

(cid:21)−σ

h R+
t
Pt

and Ct = (1 − δh)

(cid:20) pct
Pt

(cid:21)−σ

h R+
t
Pt

(5)

where x− = min {x; 0} and x+ = max {x; 0}. When net income Rt is negative, i.e. gross

income is not enough to cover for the cost of minimum energy consumption, households

consume only energy and do not demand consumption goods. Both the average and the

marginal propensity to consume energy (energy APC and energy MPC in Figure 2) are

then equal to one. Conversely, when net income Rt is positive, i.e. gross income exceeds
the cost of minimum energy consumption, the energy MPC drops from 1 to δh, while the
non-energy MPC increases from 0 to 1 − δh. As a result the energy APC gradually falls

with income, consistent with empirical evidence showing that energy accounts for a larger

fraction of the consumption basket for lower-income households (see introduction). Last,

7Household demands for energy and consumption goods are formally derived in the next section.

9

the demand C∗

st for consumption good s writes as

∗
C
st

=

(cid:35)−η

(cid:34)

pst
pct

∗
C
t

= (1 − δh)

(cid:34)

(cid:35)−η (cid:20)pct
Pt

pst
pct

(cid:21)−σ

h R+
t
Pt

(6)

Figure 2: Households’ average and marginal propensities to consume.

2.1.3 Household heterogeneity

There are two types of households. A first group of households —called unconstrained

households— is endowed with a quantity of energy (en)u that exceeds the minimum energy
> eh; owns the firms producing consumption goods; and can freely

consumption eh: (en)u

lend and borrow. A second group of households —called constrained households— is

endowed with a quantity of energy (en)c that falls short of the minimum energy consump-
< eh; has no ownership rights over firms producing consumption goods; and

tion eh : (en)c
cannot save nor borrow. A fraction ϕ of households are constrained.

Let ec denote constrained households’ energy needs, i.e. ec = eh − (en)c

> 0. Then
constrained households’ net income, when it is positive, is simply the difference between

labour income wt and the cost petec of minimum energy consumption net of the energy

endowment:

≡ (cid:2)

wt − petec

(cid:3)+

Rc
t

10

(7)

Turning now to the case of unconstrained households, their net income writes as:

Ru
t

≡ wt + peteu +

πt
1 − ϕ

+ (1 + it−1) st−1

− st

(8)

Here eu denotes the energy endowment net of the minimum energy consumption, i.e.
− eh > 0, st the savings at time t, πt the firms’ profits at time t, and it is the
eu = (en)u
nominal interest rate on savings st.8 Last, unconstrained households set their net savings
[(1 + it−1) st−1

− st] at time t, consistent with the usual Euler equation:

Ru
t
Pt

=

(cid:34)β (1 + it)
/Pt
Pt+1

(cid:35)−γ

Ru
t+1
Pt+1

and welfare for constrained and unconstrained households respectively writes as

(cid:104)
Ri
t

(cid:88)

βt

Ui =

γ − 1

(cid:105)1− 1

/Pt
1 − 1
γ

for i = {c; u}

(9)

(10)

2.2 The supply side

2.2.1 Energy and good producing firms

On the supply side, there are firms producing energy and firms producing consumption

goods. Energy is supplied by exogenous producers who sell energy to households and

firms producing consumption goods. We do not model energy producers except for the
assumption that supply of energy is infinitely elastic at the energy world price p∗
now, let us simply equate the local and world prices of energy pet and p∗

et. Later, we lay out

et. For

the uncovered interest parity relationship linking the two prices.

Conversely firms producing consumption goods operate across the different sectors

of the economy and are owned by unconstrained households —those who can borrow

and lend and have a relatively large energy endowment. The next sections detail their

technology and the choices they make on behalf of their shareholders.

8Given that eu is positive, we can rule out the case where Ru

t would be negative.

11

2.2.2 Technology and demand for inputs

Firms produce consumption goods using labour which they rent from households, and
energy which they purchase from unconstrained households and/or from the exogenous

energy producers. Specifically, output yst at time t for the firm operating in sector s, writes

as:

yst =

(cid:20)
δ

1− 1
1
σs
σs
s E
st

+ (1 − δs)

1

1− 1
σs
σs L
st

(cid:21) 1
1− 1σs

(11)

Here Est denotes the firm’s energy consumption at time t and Lst the amount of labour the

firm hires at time t from households. The elasticity of substitution between energy and
labour is σs while δs measures the energy intensity of sector s.

Let mcst denote the marginal cost to produce consumption good s at time t. The firm

producing good s then sets its price pst to maximise profits, given the marginal cost mcst

and household demand for its good:

(cid:105)−η

πst = (cid:2)
max
pst
(cid:104) pst
t and mc1−σs
C∗
pct
(cid:104) pct
= (1 − δh)
Pt

h Rt
Pt

(cid:105)−σ

yst =
C∗
t





s.t.

pst − mcst

(cid:3)

yst

+ (1 − δs) w1−σs
= δsp1−σs
t
(cid:17)
(cid:16)
+ ϕRc
1 − ϕ
Ru
t
t

st
et
and Rt =

(12)

Here the demand yst for consumption good s depends on three terms. The first reflects the
choice between different consumption goods, the second, the choice between energy and

consumption goods and the last reflects the composition of aggregate demand Rt between

constrained and unconstrained households’ demands, as expressed in (7) and (8).

The optimal price pst of consumption good s at time t simply writes as a constant

markup µ over the sectoral marginal cost, pst = µmcst with µ = η
η−1 so that the price index
for consumption goods writes as pct = µmct where mct denotes the average marginal cost
across sectors, i.e. (mct)1−η = (cid:82)
then

ds. The equilibrium level of output in sector s is

(mcst)1−η

s

yst = 1 − δh

µ

(cid:20) mcst
mct

(cid:21)1−η (cid:20) pct
Pt

(cid:21)1−σ

h Rt
mcst

(13)

As is visible from (13), sectoral output yst has standard properties: it decreases in the sec-

toral marginal cost of production mcst as well as in the average marginal cost of production

12

mct, while it increases with the elasticity of substitution between goods η, and with the
share of income 1 − δh, households spend on consumption goods, in addition to increasing

with households’ income Rt. Then using (13), profits in sector s satisfy

πst =

(cid:21)η−1

µ − 1
µ

(cid:20) mct
mcst

(1 − δh)

(cid:21)1−σ
h

Rt

(cid:20)pct
Pt

(14)

Under the assumption η > σh ≥ 1, the comparative statics for profits πst and output

yst are broadly similar: profits decrease in the sectoral marginal cost mcst as well as in the
average marginal cost mct while they increase with the share of income 1 − δh, households

spent on consumption goods and with households’ income Rt. There are still two main
differences: one is the impact of competition, the other is the impact of energy prices. For
competition, things are clear: higher competition, i.e. a higher parameter η, raises output

but reduces profits. For energy prices, things are less clear-cut: Everything else equal,

higher energy prices lead households to reduce their demand for energy and substitute

with more demand for consumption goods, which would imply higher profits. But higher

energy prices also raise the marginal cost to produce consumption goods so that energy-
intensive sectors, i.e. those with higher δs, experience a reduction in their profits.

Last, firms’ demands for energy and labour are simply the sum of firm-level energy and

labour demands across firms. Using the expression in (13) for firm-level output, aggregate

energy and labour demand by firms respectively writes as:

E f =

(cid:90) 1

0

(cid:21)−σs

δs

(cid:20) pet
mcst

ystds = 1 − δh

µ

(cid:20) pct
Pt

(cid:21)1−σ

h





(cid:90) 1

0

(cid:105)1−η

(cid:104) mcst
mct

δs
et [mcst]1−σs
σs

p





ds

Rt

(15)

and

L f =

(cid:90) 1

0

(1 − δs)

(cid:21)−σs

(cid:20) wt
mcst

ystds = 1 − δh

µ

(cid:20) pct
Pt

(cid:21)1−σ

h





(cid:90) 1

0

(cid:105)1−η

(cid:104) mcst
mct

(1 − δs)
t [mcst]1−σs
σs
w





ds

Rt

(16)

Having determined households’ demand for energy and consumption goods as well as

firms’ demand for energy and labour, we are now equipped to solve for the general

equilibrium of the economy. Moreover, to simplify the exposition, we will focus from now
on, on the case where the elasticities of substitution σh and σ f are both equal to one.

13

3 The decentralised equilibrium

In this economy, an equilibrium is a vector of prices and quantities such that:

(i) Household demands for energy and consumption goods maximise intra-temporal util-

ity; household borrowing and savings maximise inter-temporal utility.

(ii) Firm’ demands for energy and labour minimise total cost of output; consumption good

prices maximises profits.

(iii) The price of consumption goods balance households’ demand and firms’ supply; the

wage rate balances households’ labour supply and firms’ labour demand; the interest rate

balances the market for lending and borrowing.

To derive the decentralised equilibrium, we first need to determine the equilibrium of

the labour market. Then we can close the model and go through the main take-aways.
Considering a symmetric equilibrium, assuming sectoral heterogeneity away, i.e. δs = δ f
(cid:17)
(1 − δh), we can derive the following result.
and σs = σ f = 1, and denoting 1 − δ =

(cid:16)
1 − δ f

Proposition 1 The equilibrium ”real” wage rate ω = wt/pet satisfies

(cid:17)
(cid:16)
1 − ϕ

(ω + eu) + ϕ (ω − ec)

+ =

ω
1 − δ

(cid:2)

1 + δh(µ − 1)

(cid:3)

The equilibrium ”real” price of consumption goods pc = pct/pet writes as pc = µω1−δ
the equilibrium ”real” interest rate satisfies β (1 + r) = β(1+it)
/pet

= 1.

pet+1

(17)

f , and

Proof 1 cf. Appendix A.1.

In this equilibrium, all prices move one-for-one with the price of energy: the wage rate

deflated by the price of energy is constant and there is full pass-through of energy prices to

consumption goods prices and to the general price level. Changes in the nominal interest
rate also have no real effects, as energy prices would then move by the same amount, but

in the opposite direction to leaving the real interest rate unchanged.9 For this reason, we

abstract from now on, from the time subscript and denote pe the price of energy.

9The price of energy being set abroad, a change, say a cut, in the domestic nominal interest rate would
raise one to one the price of energy in local currency because of uncovered interest parity, so that the domestic
real interest rate would typically be unaffected.

14

By contrast, fluctuations in the quantity of energy available, i.e. in the energy endowments
(eu; ec), do have real effects, and these effects depend on the shape of distribution of energy

endowments. The following lemma looks at this question.

Lemma 2 Denoting the economy’s net energy endowment e = (1 − ϕ)eu − ϕec, constrained

households can participate in the demand for consumption goods if and only if

≤

ec
e

1 − δ
δ + δh(µ − 1)

(18)

In this case, households’ aggregate real income is R/P = µδ

h

(cid:21)δ

(cid:20)

δ
h(µ−1)

δ+δ

eδ
δδ(1−δ)1−δ

Proof 2 cf. Appendix A.2.

When condition (18) holds, the energy need of constrained households ec is small rela-

tive to the economy’s net energy endowment e, implying that heterogeneity in households’

energy endowments is relatively low. In this case, firms can use a large volume of energy

for production and produce a large volume of output, without cutting households’ energy

consumption below the minimum level eh.

Figure 3: The complete participation equilibrium.

In addition, as firms produce large volumes of output, they also pay out relatively

high wages, which further ensures that households, in particular constrained ones, are

15

able to cover their minimum energy consumption eh and participate to the demand for

consumption goods. We will refer to this equilibrium as ”the complete participation

equilibrium” (see Figure 3 above) in what follows.

Conversely, when condition (18) does not hold, the energy need of constrained house-

holds ec is large relative to the economy’s total net energy endowment e, i.e. heterogeneity

in households’ energy endowments is relatively large. As a result, constrained households

spend most of their labour income on energy, not on consumption goods, and the demand

for consumption goods is depressed. Demand for consumption goods being low, the
equilibrium wage rate ω is also low, which further pushes constrained households against

the minimum energy consumption constraint. In this case, constrained households are

not able to cover their minimum energy consumption, nor to participate in the demand

for consumption goods. We will refer to this situation in what follows as ”incomplete

participation” (see Figure 4 below).

Figure 4: Incomplete participation.

3.1 Demand and supply effects of energy shocks

The two types of situations —complete and incomplete participation— described above

have distinct properties, both at the aggregate and at the individual levels. Constrained
households are trivially better-off in the equilibrium with complete participation. But

16

what about unconstrained households? And how do output and real incomes vary in
response to shocks affecting the energy endowments eu and ec, in each case? The following

proposition shed some lights on these questions.

Proposition 3 Denoting λ = (1+δh(µ−1)− δµ
energy endowment e, acts as a negative demand shock if and only:

ϕ )/ (1 − δ)2, a shock that reduces the economy’s

[1 − λ]

Proof 3 cf. Appendix A.3.

1 − δ

δ + δh

(cid:0)µ − 1

(cid:1) ≤ ec
e

≤

1 − δ

δ + δh

(cid:1)
(cid:0)µ − 1

(19)

Following a negative energy supply shock, that cuts the energy endowment of con-

strained and unconstrained households, the equilibrium wage rate falls, which cuts both

households incomes and the price of consumption goods. However, when participation

is incomplete, only unconstrained households purchase consumption goods. As a conse-

quence, the drop in the price of consumption goods is smaller than the drop in income,
and households are worse-off. A negative energy supply shock therefore raises the equi-

librium interest rate as households are temporarily poorer and therefore want to borrow

to smooth out the shock.

Things can however be different in the complete participation equilibrium. In this equi-

librium, both constrained and unconstrained households purchase consumption goods.

As a result, when a negative energy supply shock hits, both types of households are poorer

and hence reduce their demand for consumption goods. However, constrained house-

holds, as they get closer to minimum energy consumption, have to cut their purchases

of consumption goods disproportionately, given that a large fraction of their demand for

energy is sticky and cannot be compressed. Hence, the fall in the price of consumption

goods can actually be larger than the fall in unconstrained households’ income. Expression

(20) isolates these two opposite forces.

Ru
t
Pt

=

(cid:34)

(cid:34)

(cid:35)

(cid:34) eδ
t
ω1−δ
(cid:124)(cid:32)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:32)(cid:125)
(−)

δh + 1 − δh
1 + ω −
µ
(cid:124)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:32)(cid:125)
(+)

(cid:20)
1 − ω ect
et

ϕ

(cid:21)(cid:35)

(cid:35)

(20)

17

On the one hand, a negative energy supply shock reduces income expressed in energy
units. This income effect is the first term in (20). On the other hand, the disproportionate

fall in the demand for consumption goods, cuts the relative price of consumption goods,
expressed in energy units. This price effect is the second term of (20). The positive
price effect then dominates the negative income effect and unconstrained households
are better-off following a negative energy supply shock when the energy need ec from

unconstrained households is neither too large nor too low relative to the economy’s total

energy endowment e.

Figure 5 plots unconstrained households real income as a function of constrained

households energy need ec. It shows that a negative energy shock —that cuts households’

energy endowment and hence raises constrained households energy need relative to the

economy’s overall energy endowment— first reduces the real income of unconstrained

households. This (first green) region corresponds to the complete participation equilib-

rium where consumption patterns of constrained and unconstrained households are very

similar, because constrained households’ energy needs are relatively low. In this region,

the relative price of consumption goods falls less quickly than income following a negative

energy shock so that households’ real income falls.

Figure 5: Negative energy supply shocks as negative demand shocks.

However, as constrained households’ energy needs increase, the difference in consump-

tion patterns between constrained and unconstrained households widens and a negative

18

energy shock triggers a significant fall in constrained household demand for consumption

goods. The fall in the relative price of consumption goods then dominates the fall in house-

hold income and, unconstrained households’ real income goes up. This is the second red

region. Finally, when constrained households energy needs are large relative to the econ-

omy’s overall energy endowment, i.e. when condition (18) holds, then the economy falls

into the incomplete participation situation and negative energy shocks reduce incomes

more than they cuts prices. As result, real incomes always fall. To wrap up, energy shocks

work as Keynesian supply shocks when the dispersion in energy endowments between

constrained and unconstrained households is intermediate, neither too low, nor too large.
Moreover, condition (19) in Proposition 2 shows that the parameter λ needs to be

positive for negative energy shocks to operate as Keynesian supply shocks. This typically
requires that the fraction ϕ of constrained households be sufficiently large and the markup
µ charged by firms producing consumption goods be sufficiently low. When ϕ is high and

there are many constrained households, a negative energy supply shock implies a larger

negative shock to the demand for consumption goods, hence a larger fall, everything else

equal, in the relative price of consumption goods. In addition, the drop in the relative price

of consumption goods depends not only the drop in aggregate demand for consumption

goods, but also on the elasticity of the inverse demand function, and hence on the markup
µ. When the markup is low, the fall in the demand for consumption goods produces a

large drop in the relative price of consumption goods, so that a negative energy supply

shock is more likely to raise unconstrained households’ real income.

To summarise, when three conditions are met, i.e (i) heterogeneity in energy endow-

ments is intermediate, (ii) the fraction of constrained households is large (iii) the markup

charged by firms is low, then negative energy supply shocks reduce the neutral real rate

that is governed by the Euler equation (9), which is typical of a negative demand shock:

1 + rt = 1
β

(cid:35) 1γ

(cid:34) Ru
t+1
Ru
t

/Pt+1
/Pt

⇒

∂

(cid:17)

/Pt

(cid:16)
Ru
t
∂e

≤ 0 ⇔

∂rt
∂e

≥ 0

19

4 The social optimum

The social planner can improve on the decentralised equilibrium allocation in two ways.

First there are welfare gains in redistributing income between constrained and uncon-
strained households as income differences imply differences in marginal utilities of con-

sumption, and hence welfare losses. Second households and firms compete in the decen-

tralised equilibrium for energy and there can be welfare gains in redistributing energy

consumption between households and firms. Let us first focus on this last issue, derive

the socially optimal allocation and compare it to that of the decentralised equilibrium.

4.1 The socially optimal allocation of energy.

Setting aside household heterogeneity, at the social optimum, the planner allocates energy

to households and firms such that the allocation maximises households’ welfare under

the constraints that (i) households’ consumption (of consumption goods) is equal to firms’

output; (ii) firms use all of households’ labour supply; and (iii) the sum of energy consump-

tion by households and firms cannot exceed the total energy endowment in the economy.

The problem for the social planner therefore writes as:

(cid:16)

u

max
Eh;E f

(cid:20)

(cid:17)

=

C =

Eh; E f




1
σ
h

δ
h (Eh − eh)
(cid:16)

σ−1
σ

(cid:20)
δ f

+

1
σ E

f

σ
−1
h
σ

h + (1 − δh)
σ (cid:21) σ
(cid:17) 1

σ−1

1 − δ f

Eh + E f = e

(cid:21)

σ

σ
h
−1

h

σ
−1
h
σ
h

1
σ
h C

(21)

We can then derive the following proposition.

Proposition 4 Households consume too little energy (and firms too much) relative to the

social optimum whenever:

Proof 4 cf. Appendix A.4.

≥ 1 − δ
δ

+ (µ − 1)δh
δϕ

ec
e

(22)

The decentralised equilibrium features two types of inefficiencies. The first is the stan-

dard distortion due monopolistic competition. The second is the distortion due to the

20

non-homotheticity in households’ energy consumption. Because of monopolistic compe-

tition, firms produce too little output in the decentralised equilibrium. As a result, they
use too little energy and the social planner corrects this inefficiency by allocating more

energy to firms. However, when heterogeneity in households’ energy endowments is

large, constrained households are unable to cover their minimum energy consumption,

at the equilibrium, and households, taken together, do not consume enough energy. The
social planner then corrects for this inefficiency by allocating more energy to households

(and less to firms) to ensure that constrained households can cover their minimum energy

consumption and participate in the demand for consumption goods. This is why house-

holds as a group consume too little energy relative to the socially optimal allocation when
the energy needs of constrained households ec/e are relatively large.

In addition, in the decentralised equilibrium, constrained households’ consumption of
both energy and purchases of consumption goods is inefficiently low, as their marginal

utility of consumption is always higher than that of unconstrained households. This is

why a social planner who wants to implement the first best-allocation needs to address two

issues: First it needs to neutralise the monopolistic competition distortion and provide

firms with incentives to consume more energy. Second, it needs to equalise incomes

across constrained and unconstrained households, which would eliminate welfare losses
stemming from differences in marginal utilities of consumption, in addition to ensuring

that constrained households are able to cover their minimum energy consumption.

4.2 Decentralising the socially optimal allocation

Consider now a social planner who aims at implementing the first best allocation, using

taxes and subsidies. For this, let us assume the social planner grants a subsidy s f to firms

on energy consumption so that firms pay a price

pe for energy instead of the market

(cid:16)
1 − s f

(cid:17)

price pe. Moreover, the social planner can raise a lump-sum tax Tu and extend a lump-
sum subsidy Sc to households. Given this tax/subsidy scheme, denoting ωt(s f , Sc, Tu) the

wage rate —expressed in energy units—, net income at time t of constrained households
/pe = ωt(s f , Sc, Tu) + Sc − ec, while net income of unconstrained households
/pe = ωt(s f , Sc, Tu) − Tu + eu + π(s f , Sc, Tu)/(1 − ϕ).

becomes Rc
t
writes as Ru
t

In this last expression,

21

π(s f , Sc, Tu) denotes firms’ profits —expressed in energy units—, when the social planner

extends a subsidy s f to firms, a subsidy Sc to constrained households and imposes a tax
Tu on unconstrained households.10 In this framework, the tax/subsidy policy implements

the first-best allocation if and only if three conditions are satisfied:

• Firms and households should consume their first-best level of energy,

• Marginal utilities of consumption should be equalised across households,

• Tax revenues should cover for subsidy expenditures.

We can derive the following result.

Proposition 5 The social planner can implement the first-best allocation, by paying a

subsidy s f to firms per unit of energy consumed, a subsidy Sc to constrained households,

and raising a tax Tu on unconstrained households, such that:

(1 − s f )µ = 1 and Sc = ec +

µ − (1 − δ)
µδ

e and

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
1 − ϕ

Tu = ϕSc +

µ − 1
µ

δ − δh
δ

e

(23)

In this case, the wage rate ωo and households’ real income Ro/Po write as

ωo = 1
µ

1 − δ

δ e and

Ro
Po

=

eδ
(1 − δ)1−δ δδ

(24)

Proof 5 cf. Appendix A.5.

The tax and subsidy scheme that implements the first-best allocation has four important

properties. First, the subsidy extended to firms s f is strictly positive and independent of

the economy’s energy endowment e. When the elasticity of substitution between energy
and labour σ f is one, firms’ total energy consumption moves one-for-one with the wage
rate ω which itself moves one-for-one with the economy’s energy endowment e. As a

consequence, the monopolistic competition distortion can be corrected with a constant

subsidy per unit of energy consumed. Second, the wage rate under the socially optimal
allocation is lower than under the decentralised equilibrium, i.e. ωo < ω. When firms get

10To simplify notations, the tax Tu and the subsidy Sc are expressed in energy units.

22

a subsidy for energy consumption, they increase their demand for energy, but they reduce
their demand for labour and the more so, the higher the elasticity of substitution σ f . Given

that household labour supply is inelastic, the subsidy on energy consumption extended to

firms typically reduces the equilibrium wage rate. The fall in the equilibrium wage rate in
turn affects households’ demand for consumption goods in two ways: through an income
and through a substitution effect. On the one hand, cheaper energy and cheaper labour

imply cheaper consumption goods, which leads households to increase their demand for

consumption goods and reduce their demand for energy. On the other hand, a lower wage

rate implies a lower income and hence a lower demand for both consumption goods and
energy. When households’ elasticity of substitution σh is one, these income and substitution
effects typically cancel each other, leaving the demand for consumption goods unchanged.
The demand for consumption goods being unaffected, the subsidy extended to firms ends

up depressing the equilibrium wage rate. In addition, when the social planner levies a tax

on unconstrained households and extends a subsidy to constrained households, this acts

in practise as a transfer of resources from agents spending a large share of their income

on consumption goods to agents spending a large share of their income on energy. As
a result, the tax/subsidy scheme is depressing the demand for consumption goods (and

increasing the demand for energy), which reinforces the drop in the demand for labour,

and hence the fall in the market clearing wage rate. This is why the equilibrium wage rate

under the first-best allocation is always lower than the equilibrium wage rate under the

decentralised equilibrium.

Third, under the first-best allocation, households’ real income Ro/Po is typically in-

creasing in the energy endowment e. As a result, a negative energy supply shock typically

reduces unconstrained household’s real income and therefore raise the equilibrium rate

of interest. In other words, negative energy shocks always act as negative supply shocks

under the first best allocation.

Fourth and last, the subsidy extended to constrained households and hence the tax

levied on unconstrained households, are both increasing in the economy’s energy endow-
ment e, i.e. ∂Sc/∂e > 0 and ∂Tu/∂e > 0. Hence, following a negative energy supply shock,

that cuts the economy’s energy endowment e, the subsidy Sc extended to constrained

23

households, and the tax Tu imposed on unconstrained households both fall. However,

the energy need ec of constrained households being non-zero, the elasticity of taxes and

subsidies to energy shocks is less than less than one:

∂Sc
∂e

e
Sc

< 1 and

∂Tu
∂e

e
Tu

< 1

(25)

Based on this property, we can then derive the following lemma.

Lemma 6 Implementing the first best allocation requires taxing a larger fraction of uncon-

strained households’ income when the economy faces a negative energy shock.

Proof 6 cf. Appendix A.6.

A negative energy shock that cuts households’ energy endowments therefore requires

to impose a larger tax rate on unconstrained households. The reason is that, following

negative energy shocks, constrained households’ income takes a double hit, one from
the fall in labour income ω and one from the increase in minimum energy consumption

ec. The marginal utility of consumption of constrained households therefore increases

much more steeply than that of unconstrained households. Equalising incomes then

requires transferring a larger share of total income to constrained households. In practise,

this means that negative energy shocks, in spite of being uniformly distributed, act as

a distributional shock, that hurt low-income, credit-constrained households, to a larger

extent.

This is clearly visible in Figure 6 below, which plots the subsidy and tax rates needed

to implement the first-best allocation. Following a negative energy shock, the subsidy to

constrained households needs to increase for a given tax on unconstrained households (or

alternatively a larger tax for a given subsidy) to ensure income equalisation (EQ and EQ’
schedules), as the negative energy shock widens the income difference across households.

Given that income equalisation has to take place under balanced budget (BB schedule),
the social planner needs to impose a larger tax rate τ.

The comparative static results derived above have one obvious implication: Given that

the social planner needs to impose a higher tax rate on unconstrained households in the

24

Figure 6: Negative energy shocks require larger rate of taxes and subsidies

face of negative energy shocks, i.e. at a time where incomes are lower, implementing the

first-best allocation may become impossible if this implies imposing tax rates in excess of

what is feasible in practise. The next proposition looks into this question.

Proposition 7 When tax rates cannot exceed τ, implementing the first-best allocation,
through subsidies to firm energy consumption and taxes/subsidies to households, is pos-

sible only if:

ϕ ec
e

≤ 1

1 − τ

(cid:34)

1 − ϕ
δ

+ (µ − 1)(δ − δh)
δµ

(cid:34) µ − ϕ(1 − δ)
δ + (µ − 1)δh

(cid:35)(cid:35)

− 1

−

µ − ϕ(1 − δ)
δ + (µ − 1)δh

(26)

Proof 7 To replicate the first-best allocation, the social planner needs to extend taxes and
subsidies in line with (23). Then assuming tax rates cannot exceed τ, implementing the

first-best allocation through a set of taxes and subsidies is not feasible if (26) holds.

Expression (26) shows that implementing the first-best allocation by relying solely on

taxes and subsidies is not possible whenever the maximum tax rate that the planner can
impose is such that (26) does not hold even for ec = 0. In this case, even if constrained

households’ energy endowment were to cover for their minimum energy consumption, tax

revenues that can be levied from unconstrained households would fall short of covering

the subsidy that needs to be extended to firms to correct for the monopolistic competition

25

distortion, and for the subsidy that needs to be extended to constrained households to

equalise marginal utilities of consumption across households. Similarly the higher the
fraction ϕ of constrained households, the more likely, tax revenues levied from uncon-

strained households will not be enough to cover for subsidies to firms and constrained

households. In this case, the social planner may need additional tools. Issuing public debt

could be one of them. We investigate this possibility in the next section.

4.3 Optimal public debt issuance.

Let us consider an economy where the energy endowment e —and its distribution across

constrained and unconstrained households— are such that the social planner can imple-

ment the first-best allocation, by taxing unconstrained households’ labour income and

subsidising firms’ energy consumption and constrained households’ labour income. In
other words, the net energy need of constrained households ec/e is sufficiently low, so that

condition (26) holds. Then, consider a negative energy shock that temporarily cuts energy

endowments, so that condition (26) stops holding and the social planner cannot anymore

implement the first best allocation, by solely relying on taxes and subsidies. We now ask if

there is a role in this setting for public debt. More specifically, if the social planner cannot

implement the first-best allocation because this would imply a tax rate that would exceed
the maximum τ, could it be that issuing debt to raise the missing resources makes the
economy as a whole better-off? And if so, under which conditions?

To answer these questions, let us first describe the social planner’s problem in more
details. Suppose until date t − 1, the economy’s total energy endowment e is sufficiently
large so that the social planner needs to impose a relatively low tax rate τ on unconstrained
households to implement the first-best allocation, i.e. τ ≤ τ. In other words, the relative
energy need of constrained households ec/e is such that condition (26) holds. So until date
t − 1, the social planner does not need to issue public debt, nor is there any public debt in

the economy.
Then at date t, a one-off, temporary, shock hits the economy and cuts the energy en-
dowment from e down to εe with ε < 1. Unconstrained households’ energy endowment
therefore drops from eu to eu − (1 − ε) e, constrained households’ net energy need increases

26

from ec to ec + (1 − ε) e. Moreover, the negative energy shock is sufficiently large —ε is
sufficiently low— so that condition (26) stops holding, i.e. the ε shock satisfies:

ε ≤

(cid:104)

(1 − τ)

ϕ − µ−ϕ(1−δ)
δ+(µ−1)δ
h

(cid:105)

+ 1−ϕ
δ

+ (µ−1)(δ−δ
h)

δµ

(cid:104) µ−ϕ(1−δ)
δ+(µ−1)δ
h

(cid:105)

− 1

(27)

(1 − τ)ϕ (1 + ec/e)

Finally from date t + 1 onward, the energy shock disappears and the energy endowment

is back to its initial steady-state level e so that the social planner can implement again, the

first-best allocation by relying solely on taxes and subsidies.

While the social planner cannot implement the first-best allocation at date t, as this

would imply setting the tax rate on unconstrained households above the maximum possi-
ble tax rate τ, it can still set the tax rate at its maximum level τ and make up for the difference

by issuing debt. The amount of debt per unconstrained household11 then satisfies:

dt = Tu (ε) − τRu(ε)/pe = [τ(ε) − τ] Ru(ε)/pe

(28)

In this expression, Tu (ε) represents the taxes, the social planner needs to raise to pay

out the subsidies to constrained households and firms, when the economy is hit with a
negative energy shock ε, τ is the maximum tax tax rate that the social planner can impose,
and Ru(ε)/pe is the income of unconstrained households in the decentralised equilibrium,
when the economy is hit with a negative energy shock ε. Issuing debt, however, implies
paying interest. How much interest the social planner has to pay at date t + 1 for the

debt issued at date t depends on unconstrained households’ Euler equation, which in turn
depends on unconstrained households’ real incomes at date t and date t + 1, respectively
/Pt+1. Given the expression for households’ real income under the first-best

/Pt and Ru
t+1

Ru
t

allocation (24), the real interest rate at date t, i.e. at the time of the negative energy shock,

satisfies

1 + rt = 1
β

(cid:35) 1
γ

(cid:34) Ru
t+1
Ru
t

/Pt+1
/Pt

= 1
βε δ

γ

(29)

As noted above, under the first-best allocation, the real interest rate increases when a

11it is convenient to express public debt as the amount held by each unconstrained household as only

unconstrained households can borrow and save and hence buy financial instruments

27

negative energy shock hits, as unconstrained households who are temporarily poorer

would like to borrow to smooth out the shock. Moreover, the increase in the real interest
rate is larger when the energy intensity δ is higher. As would be expected, a negative

energy shock is more costly in economies which are more energy intensive.

Then from date t + 1, when the economy is back to the steady-state, the social planner

can simply implement the first-best allocation by simply levying taxes and paying out

subsidies. It does however have to fund the debt issued to address the negative shock that

hit at date t, which requires raising some additional taxes, to make sure the debt does not
blow up out of proportion. Noting that at the first best, interest rates satisfy βrt+n = 1 from
date t + n onwards (with n ≥ 1), public debt at date t + n writes as

dt+n = Ro
βn−1





(1 + rt)

τ (ε) − τ
1 − τ (ε)

− 1
β

n−1(cid:88)

k=0

βn−kτa

t+n−k





(30)

where

(cid:111)

(cid:110)
τa

t+n

n≥1

denotes the additional taxes that the social planner raises to finance (part

of) the debt coming due. Then considering the case where the social planner sets constant
additional taxes, i.e. τa
= τa from date t + n, onwards (with n ≥ 1), and given that
additional and steady-state taxes cannot exceed maximal taxation, i.e. τa + τss ≤ τ, we can

t+n

derive the following proposition.

Proposition 8 The social planner can implement the first-best allocation on the back of a

negative energy supply shock, by issuing public debt, raising taxes and paying subsidies,
as long as the energy shock ε satisfies

1 +

β
1 − β [τ − τss] [ε]

δ

γ ≥ 1 − τ
1 − τ (ε)

(31)

Proof 8 cf. Appendix A.7.

Let us denote ε (τ) the largest negative energy shock for which the social planner can

implement the first best without issuing any public debt; and ε
max the shock for which
(31) holds with equality. Then it is straightforward to note that as long as τss ≤ τ, i.e.

as long as the social planner can implement the first-best allocation at the steady state,

28

without having to issue public debt, we always have ε

< ε (τ). In other words, when

max

the social planner can implement the first-best allocation at the steady state by setting a
tax rate below τ, issuing public debt allows the social planner to accommodate a larger set

of negative energy shock.

The intuition for this result is fairly simple. When the economy faces a large negative

energy shock, implementing the first best allocation may imply taxing unconstrained

households beyond what is practically possible. As a result, the social planner can issue

public debt to make up for the missing resources and redistribute the proceeds to firms and

constrained households. That said, the social planner has to commit to raise additional

taxes in the future to back the current debt issuance. In practise, the face value of public

debt cannot exceed the present value of all future additional tax revenues that the social

planner can raise, once the shock has dissipated. Hence, for the very same reason that

public debt can be useful, i.e. to bypass the social planner’s limited taxation power, public

debt cannot grow indefinitely, as it has to be backed by future tax revenues, which are

themselves limited by the social planner’s maximum taxation power.

Interestingly, issuing public debt, following a negative energy shock, can be useful for

the social planner to implement the first-best allocation, even as the energy shock acts as a

negative 