BIS Working Papers 
No 1140 

Relationship discounts in 
corporate bond trading  

by Simon Jurkatis, Andreas Schrimpf, Karamfil Todorov, 
Nicholas Vause 

Monetary and Economic Department 

November 2023 

JEL classification: G12, G14, G23, G24 

Keywords:  corporate  bonds,  Covid-19,  dealers,  over-
the-counter markets, trading relationships 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIS  Working  Papers  are  written  by  members  of  the  Monetary  and  Economic 
Department of the Bank for International Settlements, and from time to time by other 
economists,  and  are  published  by  the  Bank.  The  papers  are  on  subjects  of  topical 
interest and are technical in character. The views expressed in them are those of their 
authors and not necessarily the views of the BIS. 

This publication is available on the BIS website (www.bis.org). 

©  Bank for International Settlements 2023. All rights reserved. Brief excerpts may be 

reproduced or translated provided the source is stated. 

ISSN 1020-0959 (print) 
ISSN 1682-7678 (online) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Relationship discounts in corporate bond trading ∗

Simon Jurkatis

Bank of England

Andreas Schrimpf

BIS & CEPR

simon.jurkatis@bankofengland.co.uk

andreas.schrimpf@bis.org

Karamfil Todorov

BIS

Nicholas Vause

Bank of England

karamfil.todorov@bis.org

nicholas.vause@bankofengland.co.uk

This version: October 30, 2023

Abstract

We find that clients with stronger past trading relationships with a dealer receive consis-
tently better prices in corporate bond trading. The top 1% of relationship clients enjoy
transaction costs that are 51% lower than those of the median client—an effect which was
particularly beneficial when transaction costs spiked during the COVID-19 turmoil. We
find clients’ liquidity provision to be a key motive why dealers grant relationship discounts:
clients to whom balance-sheet constrained dealers can turn as a source of liquidity are re-
warded with relationship discounts. Another important motive for dealers to give discounts
to relationship clients is because these clients generate the bulk of dealers’ profits. Finally,
we find no evidence that extraction of information from clients’ order flow is related to
relationship discounts.

JEL Classification: G12, G14, G23, G24

Keywords: Corporate bonds, COVID-19, Dealers, Over-the-counter markets, Trading re-

lationships

∗The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) or the Bank of England. For helpful comments and discussion we are
grateful to Matteo Aquilina, Ben Charoenwong (discussant), Jaewon Choi, Francesco Franzoni, Thierry Foucault,
Jonathan Hall, Wenqian Huang, Maureen O’Hara, Igor Kozhanov (discussant), Ulf Lewrick, Jane Li (discussant),
Jessica Li (discussant), Gabor Pinter, Marco Rossi (discussant), Dimitri Vayanos, Adam Zawadowski (discussant),
Alex Zhou, and seminar participants at WFA, EFA, Microstructure Exchange, 3rd CEU-ESSEC OTC Workshop,
10th SAFE Asset Pricing Workshop, Tenth Annual Conference on Financial Market Regulation at the SEC, Bank
of England, Swiss Finance Institute in Lugano, 17th Central Bank Conference on the Microstructure of Financial
Markets, 8th SDU Finance Workshop, Financial Stability Board Conference on Systemic risks in Non-Bank
Financial Institutions and Policies to Address Them, and the Junior European Finance Conference.

1.

Introduction

The over-the-counter (OTC) structure of the corporate bond market makes the value of bilateral

interactions particularly important for investors. From a client’s perspective, having an estab-

lished relationship with a dealer can be valuable as it may allow the client to buy or sell bonds

at greater ease or lower cost. For dealers, having a relationship with a client could be beneficial

for managing inventory risk, for generating larger profits from loyal clients, or for extracting

information from the client’s order flow. The benefits of such trading relationships may be par-

ticularly pronounced during times of severe stress, like at the outbreak of the COVID-19 crisis

in March 2020, when the corporate bond market experienced significant dislocations.

In this paper, we use a unique regulatory data set on corporate bond transactions to study

bilateral trading relationships in the dealer-customer segment of the market. The dataset con-

tains information about the identities of the traders, which allows us to dig deeper into the

drivers of relationships than previous studies by exploring a rich cross-section of client types.

Our primary goal is to quantify how the heterogeneity in prices faced by different clients – a

common feature of corporate bond markets, similar to other OTC markets – can be traced to

the strength of relationships with the dealer. To guide our empirical analysis, we formulate three

hypotheses that could explain why relationships matter for dealers and test them in the data.

Our contribution is to show that clients’ liquidity provision and the attendant management of

costly balance-sheet space are important factors that can explain why dealers value relationships

with certain clients and quote them better prices. We also provide evidence that relationship

clients generate the bulk of dealers’ trading profits, suggesting a strong incentive for dealers to

keep these high-value clients as customers.

To measure the strength of dealer-client relationships, we rely on past bilateral trading volume

between the two counterparties. Specifically, we define a client as having a strong relationship

with a dealer if the client accounts for a sizable share of the dealer’s total trading volume (Qrel)

in the past. To measure the transaction-cost benefits of relationships, we follow Hendershott and

Madhavan (2015) by quantifying these costs as the log-difference between the transaction price

1

and the closest reference price before the transaction. We use reference prices from MarketAxess

at a quality and accuracy usually only available to sophisticated market participants. Our

measure of relationship benefits captures the notion that a client who has a close relationship

with a dealer obtains better prices relative to other clients of the same dealer. To precisely

identify the reduction in transaction costs related to client-dealer-specific variation, we use panel

regressions with a rich set of fixed effects (which absorb any bond, dealer, client, time, and

industry-related variation) and controls for other transaction-specific variables.

In the first part of our analysis, we provide several new stylised facts on dealer-client rela-

tionships in corporate bond markets. These facts shed new light on price differentiation in OTC

markets, which are often opaque and lack comprehensive data.

In the second part of our analysis, we examine whether relationship clients obtain better

prices. The results from our baseline panel regression imply that the top 1% of relationship

clients face a sizable 51% (4.6 basis points) reduction in transaction costs relative to the median

client. This relationship discount maps to total annual savings of around £1.3m in transaction

costs for the average top relationship client. These results are robust to various alternative

specifications and show that there are important client-dealer relationships in the corporate

bond market.

Zooming in on the COVID-19 crisis stress episode, we find the decrease in transaction costs

to be particularly important during stress times. The relationship discount more than doubled to

above 10 basis points in this period. Having a relationship with a dealer is therefore particularly

valuable during stress times, when top clients can trade bonds at much better prices compared

to others.

We also show that relationship discounts are higher for trades that affect the dealer’s balance

sheet. This result is particularly pronounced during stress times. In the COVID-19 crisis period,

when dealers were closer to inventory risk limits, relationship discounts rose sharply and became

larger for client sales. This pattern is consistent with dealers steering their residual trading

capacity towards favoured clients, especially for trades that would further increase their inventory

risk.

2

In the third part of our analysis, we dig deeper into the underlying mechanisms driving

dealer-client relationship discounts. To guide this analysis, we test three hypotheses in the

data. Our first hypothesis, “liquidity provision”, is that dealers value relationships with clients

to whom they can off-load bonds bought from other investors. Dealers may reward such clients

with relationship discounts to ensure continued access to this source of liquidity. To test this

hypothesis, we interact our relationship metric with a dummy variable for liquidity-providing

clients. We identify such clients as counterparties to whom the dealer regularly off-loads bonds

bought from other investors. If the hypothesis was true, we would expect to see that dealers

charge lower transaction costs for relationship clients who regularly provide liquidity.

Our second hypothesis, “retaining high-value clients”, builds on the idea that an important

motive for a dealer to offer better prices to certain clients is to maintain their loyalty and earn

larger profits as a result of greater trading volumes (see e.g., Maskin and Riley (1984)). The

effect is similar to shoppers continuing to go to the same shop due to discounts offered to them

(e.g., via discount cards). To test this hypothesis, we compute dealers’ total trading profits

from top and non-top clients. If the hypothesis was true, we would expect to see larger profits

from top clients relative to non-top clients on average. In addition, similar to the test for the

liquidity provision hypothesis, we interact the main relationship metric with a dummy variable

for high-value clients to test whether these clients pay lower transaction costs.

The third hypothesis, “information extraction”, is that dealers are willing to offer better

prices to relationship clients from whom they can learn private information about the value

of transacted bonds by observing their order flows (e.g., proprietary trading firms).

If such

considerations play a role, the relationship metric should have a more pronounced impact on

transaction costs for such informed clients. To test this hypothesis, we interact the main rela-

tionship metric with a dummy variable for ‘informed’ clients, which we identify as those whose

trades tend to predict future price moves.

Our results strongly support the “liquidity provision” hypothesis.

In particular, we find

evidence that dealers use relationship discounts to help control their inventories and that clients

who regularly help dealers in this way receive larger discounts. We show that clients who

3

consistently provide liquidity to dealers – i.e. by purchasing bonds shortly after dealers have

absorbed sales from other clients – receive larger relationship discounts than other top clients.

This extra discount was magnified six times during the COVID-19 episode.

In fact, it was

essentially only liquidity-providing clients who received relationship discounts during this period

of stress.

We also find evidence in support of the “retaining high-value clients” hypothesis. We show

that the average profit dealers make from top relationship clients is more than 18 times larger

than the profit from non-top clients. The much larger profit extracted from top clients gives

dealers a strong incentive to retain trading volume from these clients by offering them more

competitive prices. In addition, we find that dealers give high-value clients a larger discount

than other relationship clients, after controlling for liquidity- and information-related motives.

However, we find no evidence in support of the “information extraction” hypothesis. Rela-

tionship clients receive no additional transaction-cost discounts when their order flow provides

valuable signals about future bond returns. This finding could be explained by regulatory re-

strictions on proprietary trading by dealer-banks that were introduced in the wake of the global

financial crisis (GFC). These regulations limited the extent to which dealers can trade on sig-

nals from customer flows, thus weakening the incentive to build relationships for the purpose of

information extraction. In addition, dealers may also be reluctant to trade with informed clients

who correctly anticipate future price changes on average, or could at least charge them higher

transaction costs, due to the risk of the price moving against them after trading.

Taken together, our results point to two main economic mechanisms that could explain

relationship discounts received by clients. First, dealers value clients to whom they can “out-

source” some of their liquidity provision.

In providing liquidity to the market, dealers often

take on inventory risk. Shifting some of this risk onto liquidity-providing clients is valuable

and rewarded with transaction-cost discounts. These discounts appeared particularly impor-

tant during the COVID-19 crisis when inventory risk was magnified by asset price volatility,

and liquidity-providing clients were the only client type to receive significant transaction-cost

discounts. Second, we find that dealers earn much higher profits from a handful of high-value

4

clients compared to the vast majority of clients. This creates a strong incentive for dealers to

retain these high-value clients as loyal customers by offering them trading discounts.

The findings of our paper have several implications for investors and policy makers. First,

we find evidence that dealers continued to provide liquidity at discounted prices to relationship

clients during the COVID-19 shock. These results indicate that the OTC market structure

centred around dealer intermediation proved relatively resilient for such clients, with relationships

apparently incentivizing dealers to provide liquidity even during stress times. That said, our

findings also suggest that it is only dealers’ top clients who benefit from such relationships.

Many smaller market participants do not enjoy such benefits and their cost of accessing dealers’

balance sheets can surge in stress episodes. Second, dealers appear to particularly value clients

to whom they can turn for liquidity provision. Such access to liquidity could help dealers to

operate with smaller inventories, which are cheaper to maintain, and thus increase their own

liquidity provision. Third, the fact that dealers do not offer larger discounts to informed clients

is consistent with dealers scaling back proprietary trades, which contributed to the build-up of

risk before the GFC and were subsequently discouraged by new regulations.

Related Literature. Our paper contributes to the growing literature on the value of relation-

ships in OTC markets. Three important papers in this literature which, similar to ours, focus

on corporate bond markets, are Di Maggio et al. (2017), Hendershott et al. (2020) and O’Hara

et al. (2023). Di Maggio et al. (2017) show that dealers value relationships with other dealers in

US corporate bond markets, particularly in stress times. That study, however, focuses entirely

on relationships in the inter-dealer market whereas our paper covers the dealer-client segment

(i.e., dealer trades with ultimate “end-users”). In our sample, the dealer-client market is roughly

four times larger than the inter-dealer market as measured by the average daily trading volume.

Also, the sample in Di Maggio et al. (2017) ends in 2011 and hence covers a period that predates

important regulations implemented in the aftermath of the GFC, which had a material impact

on dealer behavior (see, inter alia, Bao et al., 2018; Dick-Nielsen and Rossi, 2019).1

1Bao et al. (2018) study the effects of the Dodd–Frank Act over the period 21 July 2010 to 31 March 2014,
and the effects of the Volcker Rule from 1 April 2014 to 31 March 2016. The authors show that dealers reduced
their market-making activity in response to the Volcker Rule.

5

Hendershott et al. (2020) study the dealer-to-client segment, but they do so for only a narrow

subset of clients, studying primarily insurance companies. The authors find that the number of

trading relationships that insurance companies have with dealers has a non-monotonic impact on

their transaction costs. Transaction costs decrease initially with a rise in the number of dealers

due to increased competition, but eventually increase as bilateral relationships become more

dispersed and weaker. Compared to Hendershott et al. (2020), we study transactions of dealers

with a much broader set of clients, covering all clients with a legal entity identifier (LEI). This

includes key players such as asset managers, non-dealer banks, principal trading firms and hedge

funds. Insurance companies account for less than 9% of total trading volume in our sample.

Consistent with the findings of our paper, O’Hara et al. (2023) show that dealers improve their

liquidity provision in the corporate bond market when they have trading relationships with

insurers.

Understanding the value of relationships from the client’s perspective is particularly impor-

tant against the backdrop of an evolving microstructure of bond markets. Key developments in

recent years have been the advent of electronic trading platforms, particularly based on request-

for-quote (RFQ) protocols, which represent an electronic form of dealer-intermediated OTC

trading. Despite this “electronification”, all-to-all trading – a prominent feature of equities or

futures markets – has so far remained very limited in cash bond markets (O’ Hara et al., 2018;

O’Hara and Zhou, 2021). Our finding that relationship clients trade on better terms than non-

relationship clients, especially in stress times, could help explain why the market may be slow

to adapt to a fully electronic and anonymous market structure. Despite the generally favourable

liquidity of market structures built around centralized limit order books (Hendershott and Mad-

havan, 2015; Abudy and Wohl, 2018), the OTC structure has shown remarkable resilience in

fixed income markets.

The preference of institutional investors for a bilateral OTC market structure is also discussed

in Biais and Green (2019) and Wittwer and Allen (2021). In particular, Biais and Green (2019)

highlight institutional traders’ preference for low price impact and their relative bargaining power

compared to retail traders as key factors in explaining the historical evolution of the US bond

6

markets towards an OTC structure. Wittwer and Allen (2021) include a loyalty benefit in their

structural model, where institutional investors choose between trading on an RFQ platform or

bilaterally. Our findings confirm the importance of including such loyalty benefits in structural

models.

Our paper highlights the heterogeneity of trading relationships between dealers and clients

and shows that this leads to large differences in trading costs. These findings have implications

for models analysing the welfare benefits of different market structures (Plante, 2018; Lee and

Wang, 2018; Vogel, 2018; Wittwer and Allen, 2021). On the one hand, removing relationship

benefits by mandating a centralized and anonymous market structure through all-to-all trading

would directly impact the utility of clients enjoying relationship discounts. On the other hand,

relationship benefits are typically given to selected clients and could be implicitly subsidized by

other clients who are less capable of establishing a relationship (e.g., due to less-frequent trading

activity).

Our paper is also related to the broader literature on dealer-client relationships in other OTC

markets, notably Hau et al. (2021). In this paper, the authors show that unsophisticated clients,

that have a relationship with only one dealer, incur larger transaction costs in FX derivatives.

More broadly, our paper also relates to the literature on dealer intermediation in the after-

math of the GFC. Several studies argue that dealers have become more constrained in their

liquidity provision and are generally less willing to warehouse bonds in their inventory (Adrian

et al., 2017; Bao et al., 2018; Dick-Nielsen and Rossi, 2019; Choi et al., 2021). This has led to

a partial shift away from the principal model of market making, where dealers warehouse risk

on their balance sheet, towards more “balance sheet-light” approaches where dealers mostly line-

up opposing client trades in advance of simultaneous execution. Our paper shows that clients

are asymmetrically impacted by these developments. Choi et al. (2021) document that clients

complement the role of dealers by stepping in as liquidity providers in the post-GFC period.

They show that dealers are more likely to turn to insurance companies with whom they have

stronger relationships to offset trades with other clients. Our paper covers dealers’ customer base

comprehensively and shows that it is mostly asset managers and brokers that provide liquidity

7

to dealers, accounting for almost 90% of the volume across liquidity-providing clients. Insurers,

by contrast, account for less than 6% of this volume. In addition, we show that dealers value

relationships with liquidity-providing clients. They do so not only by giving discounts to those

clients in normal times, but also by being prepared to support them in times of stress by offering

significant transaction-cost discounts to trade with them, and especially to absorb bond sales

from them.

Finally, a number of papers study trading relationships in OTC markets in the context of

informed trading. Kondor and Pint´er (2022) and Czech and Pint´er (2020) show that clients who

spread their trades over a larger number of dealers outperform other clients, consistent with them

hiding private information. We show, however, that dealers do not quote better prices to more

informed clients, which may be due to post-GFC regulations that have discouraged proprietary

trading or because of fears of being adversely selected.

2. Data on dealer-client transactions and corporate bond

reference prices

This section introduces our two main data sets, which come from MiFID II regulatory reporting

and MarketAxess. It then provides descriptive statistics on the corporate bonds and dealer-client

transactions in our sample.

2.1. MiFID II data

The first main dataset for our analysis consists of transaction reports in corporate bonds sub-

mitted to regulatory authorities under MiFID II, which took effect on 3 January 2018. Under

this regulation, investment firms and other trading institutions are mandated to submit reports

for their trades in debt instruments that are permitted to trade on a venue. Venues include

regulated markets (such as the London Stock Exchange), multilateral trading facilities (such as

8

RFQ platforms like TradeWeb, MarketAxess, or Bloomberg) and organised trading facilities.2

Trades have to be reported irrespective of whether they are actually carried out on a venue, as

long as the instrument is admitted to be traded on a venue. This amendment to the previous

legal framework marks a significant improvement in terms of the data coverage of OTC markets.

Under the preceding directive (MiFID I), trades had to be reported only when the instrument

was permitted to trade on a regulated market—a requirement that many corporate bonds do

not fulfil. Using these data distinguishes our paper from studies that used data collected under

the MiFID I regime. Another benefit of our data is the level of granularity and detail compared

to TRACE data for US corporate bonds. The key advantage of our MiFID II data is that they

allow us to identify both counterparties of the trade, instead of only the dealer as in TRACE.

The data are made available to us by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), the UK’s

financial markets regulator. The FCA receives reports for all transactions in reportable financial

instruments involving at least one UK investment firm or executed on a UK trading venues. Each

report includes information on the ISIN of the instrument traded, the time of the transaction

(time-stamped to at least the nearest second), the price and the quantity. As mentioned above,

each report also identifies both counterparties of the trade, including for those trades where

the counterparty is a client. This beneficial feature of our data allows us to study trading

relationships between each dealer-client pair, going beyond the inter-dealer segment. As a result,

we are able to shed light on the nature and importance of relationships from the perspective

of clients, who are the ultimate end-users that shed or take on risk exposures.3 Finally, we

complement these data with information on bond characteristics, such as maturity and credit

ratings, from S&P Capital IQ and ESMA’s Financial Instruments Reference Database System

(FIRDS).

2For precise definitions see point 20 to 23 of Article 4(1) of the MiFID II Directive. The trades in our data are
executed on a UK venue, involve at least one UK counterparty, or executed on a EU venue in a bond regulated
by the FCA. The vast majority of bonds in our sample are denominated in EUR and USD, as shown in columns
1 and 2 of Table A.1 in the Appendix.

3Inter-dealer transactions, by contrast, typically serve the purpose of inventory risk management. While
taking bonds into inventory is commonplace for non-dealers, a key incentive of dealers is to minimize inventory
risk. This is often achieved by trading in inter-dealer markets.

9

2.2. Reference prices from MarketAxess

For the computation of transaction costs, we require reference prices that reflect the fair value of

the asset at the time of the transaction. However, in OTC markets, which are highly fragmented

with only intermittent trading activity, establishing a reference price is not straightforward. A

common practice in the literature is to use inter-dealer prices, but dealer-client trades and inter-

dealer reference trades are not always proximate in the corporate bond market.

Indeed, not

infrequently they are days apart, by which time the reference price would likely have moved.

For our reference prices, we use proprietary mid-quote data from MarketAxess Composite+

(CP+). These data provide a level of pricing information that is usually only available to

sophisticated market participants.4 CP+ is based on a proprietary machine-learning pricing

algorithm developed by MarketAxess that generates pre-trade reference prices for corporate

bond investors. The pricing engine leverages data not only on the bond being priced, but also

other related bonds. The sources of data include reported trade prices, RFQ responses sent

by liquidity providers on the MarketAxess trading platform, and indications of trading interest

streamed by dealers.5 We received reference prices sampled at 8am London time, 8am New York

time and 4pm London time each day. For the period 1 to 18 March 2020, which we will use as

our crisis period, MarketAxess also provided us with reference prices on a tick-by-tick basis.

2.3. Descriptive statistics

Table 1 provides key descriptive statistics for the dealer-client transactions in our sample, which

runs from 3 January 2018 (the start of MiFID II reporting) to 18 March 2020 (the end of the

2020 dash-for-cash episode).6 In much of our paper, we investigate relationship discounts and

4The MarketAxess CP+ reference prices are observed much more frequently than inter-dealer quotes, which
are typically used in the literature to date. Table A.3 in the Appendix shows that MarketAxess CP+ prices
are observed almost four times more frequently, on average: every 2.2 hours compared to every 8 hours for
inter-dealer trades.

5The input data is then fed into a tree-based machine learning algorithm called Gradient Boosting Method

(GBM). For more information, see MarketAxess (2018).

6We do not use data shortly after the end of the COVID-19 turmoil period in order to avoid confounding our
findings with the effects of policy measures introduced in response to the COVID-19 crisis. See Table 1 on page
14 of the Bank of England’s May 2020 Monetary Policy Report.

10

transaction costs separately during normal and crisis times. Hence, we split our sample into a

pre-crisis (before March 2020) and crisis period (1 to 18 March 2020). We set the beginning of

the turmoil period to the start of increased selling pressure in bond markets.7 We choose the

end of the turmoil period, March 18, as the time when the “dash for cash” abated, due in large

part to the actions of major central banks.

Overall, our dataset comprises transactions of more than 50 dealers in corporate bond markets

pre-crisis, with almost all of them active during the COVID-19 crisis too (Panel A of Table 1).

In total, dealers interact with more than 17,300 (4,500) clients before (during) the crisis.8 We

record a total of 6.7 million dealer-client transactions in our sample, worth a total nominal value

of GBP 5.8 trillion. Overall, more than 39,200 (17,500) different bonds were traded at least once

before the COVID-19 crisis (during the crisis period).

Next, we analyze the concentration of trading, both across dealers and clients. Figure 1 (left

panel) shows that dealers differ significantly in terms of their market footprint (as measured by

their share of aggregate trading volume). Trading is highly concentrated, with the largest 14

dealers accounting for 80% of trading volume of all dealer-client transactions.9 The right panel

of Figure 1, in turn, displays the size distribution for the largest 500 clients. The concentration

of client volumes is even more extreme than that of dealers. The trading volumes of the largest

clients are equivalent to those of medium-sized dealers.

The ’Averages’ section of Panel A of Table 1 provides some further insights into trading by

dealers and customers. On average, 48 dealers were active on any given day before the crisis and

around 50 were active during the crisis. Client demand for dealers’ intermediation services and

the supply of those services both appeared to increase during the crisis: the number of clients

active in the market increased from 1,400 to 1,600, and dealers’ average daily trading volume

increased by roughly 40%. Clients interact on average with about 3 dealers on a given day,

7See, for example, charts A.4 to A.6 in the Bank of England’s August 2020 Financial Stability Report.
8This refers to all clients endowed with a Legal Entity Identifier (LEI). We exclude all transactions between
dealers and clients where both belong to the same parent company, as identified by the Global Legal Entity
Identifier Foundation (GLEIF) database.

9This finding is consistent with other studies of the corporate bond market, which also find that few dealers

have a large share of total trading volume, e.g. O’ Hara et al. (2018).

11

Table 1: Descriptive statistics

Panel A: Dealer-to-client trades

Totals

Averages

Daily

Dealer-day

Client-day

Bond-day

Pre-crisis

Crisis Pre-crisis Crisis Pre-crisis

Crisis Pre-crisis Crisis Pre-crisis Crisis

#Dealers
#Clients
#Bonds
#Trades
Volume

50.3
47.9
53
1.6k
1.4k
17.3k
5.2k
6.4k
39.2k
11.8k 16.3k
6.5m
5.6tn 181.9bn 10.2bn 14.0bn

51
4.5k
17.5k
211k

Panel B: Bond characteristics

3.2

3.2

94.9
177.2
245.8

104.9
8.1
221.9
9.9
323.1
212.3m 277.6m 7.1m 8.5m

6.9
8.3

1.6
1.9

1.8
2.1

2.3

2.6
1.9m 2.2m

Rating distribution (in %) Maturity Illiquidity
%ZTD
AAA A-AA
54.23
29.70
6.18
48.59
31.74
6.01

HY (years)
7.38
7.62

BBB
39.54 24.59
34.40 27.86

pre-crisis
crisis

%

Panel C: Client sector
Sector
Asset Manager 58.98
15.39
Bank
8.42
PFLDI
8.16
Broker
7.85
Hedge Fund
1.19
PTF

Panel D: Transaction costs (bps)

Panel E: Qrel correlation

#Obs mean

std median

pre-crisis

crisis

buy
sell

buy
sell

1.2m
1.2m

41.6k
60.6k

9.2
8.7

1.0
50.2

Panel F: Qrel distribution

Qrel (in %)

36.7
37.6

64.3
81.3

mean

1.30

5.2
3.9

4.4
21.7

std

3.53

(t, t − 1)
(i, j)

(t, t − 1)
(i, j)

(in %)

79.0
20.6

87.4
16.8

1%

0.00

25% 50%

75% 99%

0.06 0.28

1.01 16.78

Notes: This Table shows descriptive statistics for the pre-crisis (3 January 2018 to 29 February 2020) and crisis
period (1 to 18 March 2020). Panel A displays the total number of dealers (#Dealers), clients (#Clients), bonds
(#Bonds) and trades (#Trades), as well as total trading volume measured in GBP. Panel B presents bond
characteristics. Maturity is the volume-weighted average residual maturity across transactions and is measured
in years. %ZTD is a measure of illiquidity calculated as the share of days with no trade in a particular bond.
The rating distribution is measured in terms of trading volume of all bonds that had a rating in February 2020.
High-yield (HY) is all ratings below BBB. Panel C shows the share of trading volume by client sector: asset
managers, banks, pension funds, insurers and liability-driven investors (PFLDI), brokers including executing and
investing services firms, hedge funds, and proprietary trading firms (PTF). Panel D shows average transaction
costs measured in basis points (bps) for client buys and sells. Panel E presents average relationship persistence
(row (t, t − 1)) and overlap (row (i, j)) as defined in Eqs. (4) – (5). The relationship metric is calculated as the
client’s trading volume relative to that of all other clients of the same dealer over a window of 180 days before the
time of the transaction: see Eq. (3). Panel F presents the distribution of the relationship metric Qrel measured
in % across all transactions.

12

Figure 1: Trading volume concentration across dealers and clients

Notes: The Figure displays the share of trading volume (in %) for dealers (left) and clients (right) over the full
sample period.

whereas dealers interact with 95 clients (105 during crisis), corroborating the earlier observation

that clients’ trading behavior is much more concentrated than that of dealers.

We next study the main characteristics of the bonds traded in our sample in terms of credit

risk, duration, and liquidity. Specifically, we provide statistics for volume-weighted aggregate

measures of the bonds’ credit rating, time-to-maturity, and percentage of zero-trading-days

(%ZTD). Panel B of Table 1 shows that the average bond has around 7.4 years to maturity

and does not trade on 54% of trading days. The latter figure decreases to 49% in the crisis, sug-

gesting that more liquid bonds were traded during the COVID turmoil. In terms of credit quality,

around one (three) quarter(s) of trading volume is in high-yield (investment-grade) bonds.

Finally, we study the composition of investors active in corporate bond trading. Panel C of

Table 1 reports the distribution of trading volume across different client sectors in the whole

sample. The asset management sector is by far the largest, accounting for 59% of the trading

volume. Banks that do not form part of the dealer community are the second largest group with

more than 15% of trading volume. Pension funds, insurance companies and other liability-driven

investors (PFLDI), as well as brokers and hedge funds each account for around 8% of trading

volume. Principal trading firms (PTFs) have a small share of the total trading volume, which

might be related to the low degree of electronification in corporate bond trading. We provide

13

some additional summary statistics on currencies, countries of residence of issuers, and industries

in the Online Appendix, Table A.1 and Table A.2.

3. Empirical strategy and measurement of key variables

The main goal of our paper is to study the extent to which dealers give transaction-cost discounts

to clients, depending on the strength of their past trading relationships with those clients. In this

section, we start by setting out our econometric approach—panel regressions with a rich set of

fixed effects in order to tease out the effect of relationships on transaction costs. We then describe

and present stylized facts on our main dependent and independent variables: transaction costs

faced by different clients and our measure of dealer-client relationship strength (Qrel).

3.1. Econometric approach

To understand if the strength of relationships between dealers and their clients affects the trans-

action costs that clients incur, we estimate panel regressions with fixed effects of the form:

T Cbdct = γ Qreldct + X′

bdct β + 1′µ + εbdct,

(1)

where T Cbdct is the transaction cost for a trade between dealer d and client c in bond b at time

t and Qreldct is our relationship measure (which we describe below).

Fixed effects. The vector µ in Eq. (1) contains bond-month, dealer-month, client-month and

industry-day fixed effects. This rich set of fixed effects allows us to control for many observable

and unobservable variables that may influence transaction costs. For example, a bond’s liquidity

likely affects transaction costs for all clients. Including bond-month fixed effects thus ensures

that our results are not affected by relationship clients systematically trading more liquid bonds.

Similarly, the size, network centrality, or market power of clients and dealers could also affect

transaction costs. However, including client-month and dealer-month fixed effects ensures that

14

our results are not driven by such characteristics. Industry-day fixed effects absorb any variation

in transaction costs related to systematic time-varying differences by day and across industries:

e.g., if relationship clients systematically trade bonds from certain industries, which could affect

the crisis results, for example, given the nature of the COVID shock. In several robustness tests,

we also include dealer-day and bond-day fixed effects.

Additional controls. We control for additional variables in the vector Xbdct. These include three

dummy variables, sellbdct, matchbdct and M T Fbdct, which take the value 1 if the client sells, the

dealer matches the trade with a transaction in the opposite direction, or the trade is executed on

a regulated market or multilateral trading facility, respectively.10 To compute matchbdct, a match

is defined to be a transaction in which the dealer buys/sells the bond instantaneously and does

not take on any balance-sheet risk. In practice, a dealer would line up these trades with different

clients in advance and then execute them simultaneously, which is captured by our dummy.11

In general, we would expect such transactions to be associated with lower costs for the client,

as shown by Goldstein and Hotchkiss (2020). We also expect that having a strong relationship

with a dealer could be more beneficial for non-matched trades, which would require the dealer

to warehouse some risk. Since more volatile bonds could have larger transaction costs, we also

control for bond’s volatility by including the lagged squared intra-day return on the benchmark,

bt−1.12 Finally, we also control for the size of the transaction (in logs).
r2

3.2. Measuring transaction costs

To capture price discounts that dealers offer to (certain) clients, we compute the transaction

costs faced by clients trading with the dealer. We follow Hendershott and Madhavan (2015),

10Since trading on regulated markets, such as the London Stock Exchange, accounts for less than 1%, the

M T F dummy effectively captures trading on multilateral trading facilities.

11All other trades in which the dealer trades the same bond in opposing directions - even if only a few seconds

apart - are not pre-arranged and thus are risky for the dealer since she acts as a principal.

12We use lagged squared returns instead of contemporaneous ones to avoid bias in OLS estimates, which stems

from using future benchmark price changes for transactions observed before the end of the day.

15

Hau et al. (2021) and others to measure transaction costs as

T C = log

(cid:19)

(cid:18) P
Pb

× D,

(2)

where P denotes the transaction price, Pb is the closest CP+ mid-quote for the traded bond

in the 24 hours prior to the transaction, and D is the trade direction of the client, taking the

value +1 for a purchase and -1 for a sale. We multiply transaction costs in Eq. (2) by 10,000 to

measure them in basis points (bps).

The transaction cost measure in Eq. (2) captures the extent to which the price paid by the

client differs from the reference price prevailing in the market at the time of the transaction.

This measure captures the transaction costs from the client’s perspective.

Basic descriptive statistics on transaction costs. Panel D of Table 1 reports the volume-

weighted average transaction costs for client purchases and sales (denoted by buy/sell), both

before and during the March 2020 stress period.13 We see that average transaction costs for

client sales (dealer purchases) of 9.2 bps were similar to those for client purchases (8.7 bps) in

the pre-crisis period. However, during the crisis period, transaction costs became highly asym-

metric for client sales vs. client purchases. Transaction costs dropped to around 1 bp for client

purchases but jumped fivefold to 50 bps for sales during the crisis. At this time, dealers faced

significant net selling pressure from clients. Hence, they may have tried to discourage client sales

(which would have further increased the size of their balance sheets) through higher transaction

costs, and encouraged client purchases (which would provide balance sheet relief) through lower

transaction costs.

3.3. Measuring dealer-client relationship strength

We now turn to the measurement of our key variable that seeks to capture the strength of a

relationship between a dealer and a client.

13The number of observations in Panel D and in our regression sample is smaller relative to other panels in

Table 1 because we use only transactions for which there is a benchmark price observed in the last 24 hours.

16

We measure the strength of dealer-client relationships ahead of each transaction. To do this,

we begin by calculating the total trading volume of the dealer-client pair across all bonds over

the previous 180 days, lagged by one week.14 We then divide that measure by the total volume

of trading between the dealer and all of its clients. This gives us the share of trading volume

that dealer d obtains from trading with client c:

Qreldct =

(cid:80)

k∈C

(cid:80)t−7

τ =t−187 Qdcτ
(cid:80)t−7

τ =t−187 Qdkτ

,

(3)

where C is the set of clients of the dealer over the 180 days window. Intuitively, Qrel captures,

from a dealer’s perspective, the importance of a particular client based on its contribution to

the dealer’s overall trading volume over the past 180 days.

Basic facts on dealer-client relationships. We now present some basic descriptive statistics

on our dealer-client relationship measure. Panel F of Table 1 reports the distribution of the

relationship metric over all dealer-client transactions in our sample. As the Table shows, the

vast majority of clients only account for a small share of a dealer’s trading volume: the median

Qrel client accounts for only 0.28% of dealer’s trading volume. However, there is a significant

heterogeneity among clients as indicated by the large standard deviation (relative to the median

and mean). An important observation is that there is a small number of clients who account for

a sizeable portion of a dealer’s overall trading business: the top 1% of Qrel clients accounts for

about a sixth of a dealer’s trading volume over the past 180 days.

To gain further insights into the nature of relationships in corporate bond trading, we examine

the persistence and overlap of relationships. First, for each dealer, we measure the persistence of

client relationships over time based on the correlation of client volume shares over two adjacent,

14We use the lagged measure to make sure that the information is readily available to a dealer and can serve
as an input into the quote setting when responding to a client’s trading requests. Our results are similar if we
use one day or one week lag, or 90 days window (see Table A.4 in the Online Appendix).

17

non-overlapping periods:

corrQd(t, t − 1) = corr(Qreld,t, Qreld,t−1),

(4)

where Qreld,t denotes the vector of client volume shares in a dealer’s overall trading volume at

time t.15 Panel E in Table 1 shows that relationship strengths are fairly persistent over time.

The average corrQd(t, t − 1) is 79% in the pre-crisis period and the correlation measure increases

to 87% during the COVID-19 turmoil.

Second, to investigate whether relationship clients of one dealer (i) overlap with those of

other dealers (j), we use a similar metric to corrQd(t, t − 1), but computed over the cross-section

of dealers:

corrQt(i, j) = Corr(Qreli,t, Qrelj,t).

(5)

Panel E in Table 1 shows that relationship clients are not especially common across dealers.16

On average, the cross-sectional correlation measure corrQt(i, j) is only 21% in the pre-crisis

period. This finding suggests that when clients have a strong relationship with a dealer they tend

to be quite loyal to that dealer and do not simultaneously show up as a strong relationship client

for another dealer. The cross-sectional correlation between dealers’ Qrel measures decreased

slightly during the crisis period. This pattern suggests that the trading of relationship clients

became even more concentrated during that episode, with clients increasing their reliance on

their relationship dealer.

15In unreported results we used the rank correlation and, as an alternative measure, the share of a dealer’s top
clients in one period that were also top clients in the previous 180-days period. Both measures also showed high
persistence of relationships over time.

16Again, this finding is robust to using the rank correlation and an alternative measure based on the share of
a dealer’s top clients that are also top clients of another dealer during the same period. The results are excluded
for brevity.

18

4. Relationship discounts in corporate bond trading

In this section, we report our baseline results on relationship discounts obtained from estimating

Eq. (1). We begin with relationship discounts in normal times, before turning to discounts

during the COVID-19 crisis period. We also report how transaction costs vary with several

trade characteristics.

Table 2 (Panel A) presents results for the pre-crisis period. It shows that the relationship

metric Qrel has a negative and statistically significant effect on transaction costs, regardless of

our fixed effects specification. The coefficient estimates in columns 1 and 2 imply that transaction

costs are 0.28 basis points lower for every percentage point increase in Qrel. This suggests

that top-percentile clients, with Qrel = 16.8 (as reported in Table 1), pay transaction costs

that are 4.6 basis points lower than those of median clients with Qrel = 0.3 (calculated as

−0.28 × (16.8 − 0.3) = −4.6). This reduction for relationship clients represents a sizeable 51%

discount on the average transaction cost of 9 basis points that the typical clients face in the

pre-crisis period. It amounts to annual savings of £1.3m based an average daily trading volume

of £11m for top clients and 252 trading days (£11m ×4.6/10, 000 × 252 = 1.3m).

Table 2 (Panel B) presents results for the COVID-19 crisis period. It shows coefficient es-

timates for Qrel that are roughly double their pre-crisis values. For example, the medium

estimate in column 5 suggests that transaction costs were 0.61 basis point lower for every

percentage point increase in Qrel. This implies that top-percentile clients paid transaction

costs that were 10.1 basis points lower than those of median clients during the crisis period

(−0.61 × (16.8 − 0.3) = −10.1), more than double the 4.6 basis point reduction in the pre-crisis

period.

These pre-crisis and crisis results hold after controlling for other potential determinants of

transaction costs. In particular, we control for several trade characteristics that may influence

transaction costs, including through their effects on dealer balance sheets.

First, we allow for trade size to affect transaction costs. Consistent with previous studies

(e.g. Pint´er et al., 2022b), we find that larger trades are more expensive to execute. This may

19

Table 2: Baseline results on relationship discounts

Panel A: Pre-crisis

Panel B: Crisis

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

−27.93∗∗
(9.78)
−3.45∗∗∗
(0.85)
−0.77
(1.44)
0.61∗∗∗
(0.06)
2.34∗∗
(0.85)
−0.07
(0.38)

−27.85∗∗
(9.80)
−3.45∗∗∗
(0.85)
−0.80
(1.43)
0.61∗∗∗
(0.06)
2.31∗∗
(0.85)
−0.44
(0.30)

−31.93∗∗∗ −52.89∗∗
(26.13)
(10.12)
−3.64∗∗∗ −10.07∗∗∗
(0.74)
−0.02
(1.63)
0.69∗∗∗
(0.06)
2.59∗∗
(1.06)

(2.56)
38.49∗∗∗
(3.96)
0.47∗
(0.28)
−0.73
(2.17)
6.68∗∗∗
(0.59)

−60.89∗∗
(27.75)
−7.63∗∗∗
(2.02)
36.19∗∗∗
(3.79)
0.53∗
(0.28)
0.57
(1.98)
−0.95
(0.76)

−69.15∗∗
(29.92)
−6.37∗∗∗
(1.78)
39.60∗∗∗
(4.56)
1.24∗∗∗
(0.33)
0.15
(2.25)

2.3m
0.20

2.3m
0.21

1.9m
0.35

91.6k
0.31

91.6k
0.36

84.5k
0.48

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Qrel

ismatch

sell

logQ

MTF

r2
bt−1

Nobs
R2

Fixed effects
dealer × month
client × month
bond × month
industry × day
dealer × day
bond × day
dealer
client
bond

Notes: This Table shows the results of our baseline regression (Eq. (1)) for the pre-crisis period from 3 Jan
2018 to 29 Feb 2020 (Panel A) and the crisis period from 1 to 18 March 2020 (Panel B). The dependent variable
is the transaction cost of a corporate bond trade between a dealer and a client as described in Eq. (2) and
measured in basis points. The independent variables are: Qrel, the share of the client’s trading volume in total
dealer’s trading volume over a past window of 180 days as defined in Eq. (3); match, an indicator variable
equal to one if the dealer offsets the trade with other trades executed at the same instant and in the opposite
direction; sell, an indicator variable equal to one if the client is selling; MTF, an indicator variable equal to one
if the trade is executed on a regulated market (e.g., London Stock Exchange) or a multilateral trading facility
(e.g., MarketAxess); logQ, the natural logarithm of the trade size measured in GBP and r2
bt−1, the MarketAxess
benchmark’s lagged squared daily return. Standard errors (shown in parentheses) are clustered at the dealer and
month level for the pre-crisis period and at the dealer level for the crisis period. Asterisks indicate significance
levels (∗∗∗= 1%, ∗∗= 5%, ∗= 10%).

20

reflect compensation for dealers for taking on more inventory risk when absorbing larger trades.

Second, we include a control dummy variable that takes the value of one for trades executed

electronically on a multilateral trading platform. We find that in non-crisis times, transaction

costs for trades executed on such platforms are about 2.5 basis points higher than for other OTC

trades.

Third, we control for matched trades. In a matched trade, a dealer simultaneously executes

pre-arranged offsetting sales and purchases, such that the set of trades has no effect on its

bond inventory. Transaction costs may be lower for matched trades as dealers do not require

compensations for any additional inventory risk (Goldstein and Hotchkiss, 2020; Choi et al.,

2021). Indeed, we find that in normal times transaction costs for matched trades are about 3.5

basis points lower than for non-matched trades. We also find this effect to be 2–3 times larger

in the crisis period. This suggests that dealers charge more for balance-sheet-intensive trades,

especially at times of crisis, when dealer balance sheets are likely to be more constrained.

Finally, we allow transaction costs to vary with the direction of the client’s trade. In situations

where dealers do not already have a pre-arranged matching trade, a client sale results in the

dealer taking the bond into its inventory, whereas a client purchase draws from the dealer’s

inventory. While the former will tighten balance-sheet constraints, the latter will alleviate them.

Despite this asymmetry, we find no significant difference between transaction costs for client

purchases and sales in the pre-crisis period. In the crisis period (Panel B of Table 2), however,

we find that client sales were much more expensive than client purchases: in fact, 36–40 basis

points more expensive. A likely explanation is that higher volatility during the crisis boosted

dealers’ inventory risk and left them less able to absorb additional bond sales. This was likely

compounded by expectations that bonds would need to be held in inventories for longer, given

the imbalanced market with few buyers. Hence, dealers tried to deter trades that would add to

their inventories by making them relatively expensive.

Relationship discounts for unmatched trades. We next study whether balance sheet motives

interact with the size of the discount given to relationship clients. Since unmatched trades are

21

more likely to affect dealer inventories, we first test whether the discount given on unmatched

trades differs across relationship and non-relationship clients. We do so by estimating:

T Cbdct = γ Qreldct + α1 nomatchbdct + β1 nomatchbdct × Qreldct + X′

bdctβ + 1′µ + εbdct.

(6)

As shown in the first column of Panel A in Table 3, and consistent with earlier results, dealers

charge roughly 4 basis points more to execute unmatched trades compared to matched trades

in the pre-crisis period (α1). More importantly, dealers offer a relationship discount of about

31 basis points per unit of Qrel for unmatched trades (γ + β1), compared to an insignificant

9 basis points discount for matched trades (γ). During the crisis period (Panel B), both the

unconditional cost of unmatched trades (α1) and the relationship discounts for such trades

(γ + β1) increased sharply. These results are consistent with dealers applying preferential pricing

to relationship clients in principal trades that require dealers to warehouse risk on their balance

sheet.

We next study whether dealers give larger discounts for unmatched client sales than un-

matched client purchases.

In the corporate bond market, a client sale usually increases the

dealer’s inventory, whereas a client purchase tends to be filled out of the dealer’s inventory and

hence reduces it.

Hence, we interact the dummy variables for unmatched trades and client sales and estimate

the following regression:

T Cbdct = γ Qreldct + α1 nomatchbdct + α2 sellbdct + α3 nomatchbdct × sellbdct

+ β1 Qreldct × nomatchbdct + β2 Qreldct × sellbdct + β3 Qreldct × nomatchbdct × sellbdct

+ X′

bdctβ + 1′µ + εbdct.

(7)

The coefficient β3 then captures the additional relationship discount for unmatched client

sales, and the overall relationship discount for such trades is γ + β1 + β2 + β3. The large negative

estimate on β3 in column 4 shows that dealers charge relationship clients significantly smaller

22

costs for unmatched client sales during the crisis.17 Thus, when dealers faced one-sided selling

pressure that clogged their balance sheets, they gave preferential pricing to relationship clients.

The results from this section suggest two immediate conclusions about transaction costs in

corporate bond markets. First, they differ markedly depending on the strength of the dealer-

client trading relationship. Second, they depend on how the trade affects the dealer’s inventory.

In line with this, we observe that non-matched trades in general, and client sales in the crisis

period, are more expensive. Taken together, these two inferences suggest that dealers ration

their balance-sheet space through their pricing behavior, but that they do so in a differentiated

way across clients depending on the strength of the trading relationships with these clients.

5. Why do dealers give relationship discounts?

In this section, we test three hypotheses that could explain why dealers give relationship discounts

to clients: “liquidity provision”, “retaining high-value clients” and “information extraction”. We

find that dealers give larger discounts to clients to whom they often turn for liquidity provision,

which allows them to manage their bond inventories more efficiently. We also find that discounts

appear related to dealers’ profit motives, as “high value” clients, who generate the bulk of dealers’

trading profits, receive lower transaction costs. However, we find no evidence that information

extraction is a driver of relationship discounts.

To test the three hypotheses, we identify the top 1% of liquidity-providing, high-value, and

informed clients, and estimate the following regression:

T Cbdct = γ Qreldct + δ Qreldct × ιdct + α ιdct + Xbdctβ + 1′µ + εbdct,

(8)

where ιdct is a dummy for the respective category of clients. If δ < 0, the category of clients

receives a larger discount than other clients supplying the same share of the dealer’s trade volume

(Qrel).

17The total reduction in transaction costs during the crisis γ + β1 + β2 + β3 = −159.38 is significant at the

12% level.

23

Table 3: Relationship discounts and balance-sheet intensive trades

Panel A: Pre-crisis

Panel B: Crisis

nomatch
(1)

nomatch × sell
(2)

nomatch
(3)

nomatch × sell
(4)

−8.82
(7.57)
−22.10∗∗∗
(7.30)

3.82∗∗∗
(0.92)
−0.80
(1.43)

−30.91∗∗∗

2.3m
0.21

−11.86
(7.03)
−22.58∗∗
(10.28)
5.88
(8.16)
1.59
(13.45)

3.34∗∗∗
(0.87)
−1.77
(1.67)
0.95∗∗∗
(0.33)

−34.44∗∗
−5.98
−26.97∗

2.3m
0.21

−43.96
(46.61)
−19.72
(38.37)

7.99∗∗∗
(1.72)
36.20∗∗∗
(3.79)

−63.67∗∗

91.6k
0.36

−39.63
(63.86)
133.30
(88.87)
−9.51
(66.43)
−243.50∗
(142.60)
8.76
(6.11)
40.98∗∗∗
(9.11)
−1.68
(9.63)

93.62
−49.14
−159.38

91.6k
0.36

Qrel (γ)

Qrel × nomatch (β1)

Qrel × sell (β2)

Qrel × nomatch × sell (β3)

nomatch (α1)

sell (α2)

nomatch × sell (α3)

γ + β1
γ + β2
γ + β1 + β2 + β3

Nobs
R2

Notes: This Table shows the estimates from the regressions Eq. (6) (columns (1) and (3)) and Eq. (7) (columns (2)
and (4)) for the pre-crisis and crisis period. Pre-crisis regressions (Panel A) include dealer-month, client-month,
bond-month and industry-day fixed effects, and standard errors (shown in parentheses) are double clustered by
month and dealer. For the crisis period (Panel B) regressions include dealer, client, bond and industry-day fixed
effects, and standard errors are clustered by dealers. Asterisks indicate significance levels (∗∗∗= 1%, ∗∗= 5%, ∗=
10%).

24

Table 4: Percent of trading volume by sector in different client categories

sector

Asset Manager
Bank
PFLDI
Broker
Hedge Fund
PTF

top clients
(1)

liquidity clients high-value clients
(3)

(2)

informed clients
(4)

63.17
2.32
11.11
18.12
4.57
0.71

60.27
0.94
5.83
28.70
3.68
0.59

85.22
0.03
11.04
0.00
3.17
0.54

66.56
8.93
11.94
8.10
1.97
2.50

Notes: The table shows the percentage of trading volume by client sector (excluding other financials, non-
financials and unclassified clients). ‘Broker’ includes brokers, executing and investing services, ‘PFLDI’ include
pension funds, insurers and liability driven investors, ‘PTF’ are proprietary trading firms. The column ’top
clients’ shows the percentage by sector among the dealers’ top-1% clients according to their Qrel measure, the
columns ’liquidity clients’, ’high-value clients’ and ’informed-clients’ show the percentages among the top 1%
liquidity