BIS Working Papers 
No 1050 
Population aging and 
bank risk-taking 

by Sebastian Doerr, Gazi Kabaş and Steven Ongena 

Monetary and Economic Department 

November 2022 

JEL classification: E51, G21. 

Keywords:  Risk-taking,  financial  stability,  low 
interest  rates, population aging, demographics. 

BIS  Working  Papers  are  written  by  members  of  the  Monetary  and  Economic 
Department of the Bank for International Settlements, and from time to time by other 
economists,  and  are  published  by  the  Bank.  The  papers  are  on  subjects  of  topical 
interest and are technical in character. The views expressed in them are those of their 
authors and not necessarily the views of the BIS. 

This publication is available on the BIS website (www.bis.org). 

©  Bank for International Settlements 2022. All rights reserved. Brief excerpts may be 

reproduced or translated provided the source is stated. 

ISSN 1020-0959 (print) 
ISSN 1682-7678 (online) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Population aging and bank risk-taking

Sebastian Doerr

Gazi Kaba¸s

Steven Ongena

BIS

Tilburg

UZH, SFI,

KU Leuven & CEPR

November 2022

Abstract

What are the implications of an aging population for ﬁnancial stability? To ex-
amine this question, we exploit geographic variation in aging across U.S. counties.
We establish that banks with higher exposure to aging counties increase loan-to-
income ratios, especially where they operate no branches. Laxer lending standards
also lead to higher nonperforming loans during downturns, suggesting higher credit
risk. Inspecting the mechanism shows that aging drives risk-taking through two
contemporaneous channels: deposit inﬂows due to seniors’ propensity to save in
deposits; and depressed local investment opportunities due to seniors’ lower credit
demand. Banks thus look for riskier clients in no-branch counties.

JEL classiﬁcation: E51, G21.

Keywords: Risk-taking, ﬁnancial stability, low interest rates, population aging, demo-
graphics.

Sebastian Doerr is at the Bank for International Settlements (sebastian.doerr@bis.org). Gazi Kaba¸s
is at Tilburg University (g.kabas@tilburguniversity.edu). Steven Ongena is at University of Zurich,
Swiss Finance Institute, KU Leuven, NTNU, and CEPR (steven.ongena@bf.uzh.ch). We thank our
discussants Bo Becker, Robin Greenwood, Andrew Mackinlay, George Pennacchi, Romina Ruprecht,
Neeltje van Horen, and Jinyuan Zhang; as well as Adrien Auclert, Andreas Barth, Martin Brown,
Tabea Bucher-Koenen, Andreas Fuster, Emilia Garcia-Appendini, Jose Jorge, Oguzhan Karakas, Luca
Mazzone, Kasper Roszbach, and Simon Rother. We also thank participants at the American Finance
Association Annual Conference, Financial Intermediation Research Society Conference, Western Finance
Association 2022 Meeting, FDIC 20th Annual Bank Research Conference, JFI-Nova SBE Conference on
Financial Intermediation and Corporate Finance, Norges Bank-CEPR Workshop on Frontier Research in
Banking, European Economic Association Annual Conference, ZEW conference on Ageing and Financial
Markets, SFI Research Days, Annual Meeting of the Swiss Society for Financial Market Research, and the
Seminar for Contract Theory, Banking and Money at University of Zurich. Kaba¸s and Ongena gratefully
acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme ERC ADG 2016 (No. 740272:
lending). The views
expressed here are those of the authors only, and not necessarily those of the Bank for International
Settlements.

1

1

Introduction

The U.S. population of age 65 and above will grow by 18 million (or 33%) over the next
decade, and similar developments are taking place in most other advanced economies.
This unprecedented rise in the senior population has led to a debate on whether popula-
tion aging leads to a build-up of risks in the ﬁnancial sector. High savings rates among
seniors might lead to an abundance of savings and depressed returns, thereby potentially
encouraging banks to reach for yield (IMF, 2019).1 Low expected returns and banks’
reach for yield, in turn, could give rise to ﬁnancial instabilities (Brookings, 2019).

This paper provides the ﬁrst evidence on how an aging population aﬀects bank lending
standards. For identiﬁcation, we exploit the extensive variation in aging that has already
occurred across U.S. counties, combined with granular data on bank mortgage loans and
deposits. We ﬁnd that banks more exposed to aging counties relax lending standards
as they grant new loans:
loan-to-income ratios increase, and in particular in counties
where banks operate no branches. Banks with greater exposure also see a sharper rise
in nonperforming loans during downturns, implying an increase in credit risk due to
population aging. Further analysis suggests that these patterns are shaped by two forces:
an increase in banks’ available funds due to seniors’ higher propensity to save in the
form of deposits, and a contemporaneous aging-induced decrease in the local demand for
credit.

To measure banks’ presence in aging counties and how it aﬀects lending standards,
we deﬁne bank exposure as the weighted average change in the number of seniors across
counties where banks have branches. Weights are given by deposit shares at the beginning
of the sample period. Intuitively, banks with higher exposure have a larger footprint in
counties that see a stronger increase in seniors. Our main analysis focuses on the 1997–
2007 period, and does so for three reasons. First, the period after the ﬁnancial crisis of
2007/08 is characterized by substantial ﬁnancial regulatory reforms. These reforms have
aﬀected banks’ lending decisions and hamper an identiﬁcation of the respective channels
through which population aging aﬀects bank risk-taking. Second, we can exploit the
Great Recession as a negative shock to see whether aging-induced risk-taking manifests
itself in higher nonperforming loans during a downturn. And third, we avoid the zero
lower bound on interest rates (Leahy et al., 2022).

1Indeed, population aging is a major driver of falling interest rates (Carvalho et al., 2017; Conesa
and Kehoe, 2018), and low rates have been associated with higher risk-taking (Dell’Ariccia et al., 2017;
Heider et al., 2021).

2

Bank exposure could be correlated with observable or unobservable bank characteris-
tics, posing a challenge to identiﬁcation. We address this challenge in a number of ways.
First, we document that high- and low-exposure banks are similar in terms of initial bal-
ance sheet characteristics, for example in terms of size, capital ratio, or return on assets.
In line with the balancedness in bank co-variates, in regressions we ﬁnd that including
bank controls and bank ﬁxed eﬀects barely aﬀects the magnitude of our estimated coeﬃ-
cients, despite increasing the R2 substantially. Bank exposure to aging counties is hence
likely uncorrelated with observable and unobservable bank characteristics, reducing po-
tential concerns about self-selection and omitted variable bias (Altonji et al., 2005; Oster,
2019).

Second, we develop an instrumental variable approach that exploits the predetermined
component of counties’ age structure. Speciﬁcally, we predict the change in the popula-
tion of ages 65 and above from 1997 to 2007 with the change in the population of age 45
to 65 from 1977 to 1987 in the same county. We then re-construct exposure, but based
on aging predicted from historical trends, and use it as an instrumental variable (IV) for
actual bank exposure to aging counties. This approach builds on the assumption that the
historical demographic structure is plausibly exogenous to changes in contemporaneous
confounding factors. Such factors include, for example, changes in life expectancy or
economic conditions. To support the plausible exogeneity of our instrument, we show
that directly controlling for banks’ exposure to contemporaneous changes in county char-
acteristics (e.g. changes in income per capita or the unemployment rate) does not aﬀect
our conclusions.

Armed with our measure of bank exposure, we establish that banks more exposed
to aging counties relax their lending standards. As the main measure for risk-taking we
focus on the loan-to-income (LTI) ratio, which is highly correlated with ex-post default
(Fuster et al., 2021). Our results show that a 33 percentage point (pp) increase in bank
exposure is associated with a signiﬁcant rise in LTI ratios by around 23 pp.2 The eﬀect of
exposure on LTI ratios is particularly strong in counties where banks have no branches.
As a greater borrower distance to the nearest branch can result in less eﬃcient screening
and monitoring (DeYoung et al., 2008; Granja et al., 2018; Liberti and Petersen, 2019),

2Note that the increase of 33% in the number of seniors corresponds to the expected U.S. growth in
the senior population over the next decade, from 2021 to 2030. The unconditional mean and standard
deviation of the county-level growth in the number of seniors between 1997 and 2007 equal 12% and
15%, respectively. An increase in bank exposure by 33 pp occurs hence, for example, when moving
from a bank with zero exposure to a bank with 33% exposure, which is a bank exposed to counties that
deposit-weighted have a growth in seniors equal to the expected growth in the U.S. over the next decade.

3

the rise in LTI ratios in no-branch counties suggests an increase in credit risk.3 Local
aging could hence not only lower lending standards in general, but also have geographic
spillover eﬀects to ﬁnancial stability in other markets.

The rise in LTI ratios could in principle be explained by diﬀerences in the type of
markets that more and less exposed banks serve. To absorb all observable and unobserv-
able borrower-county characteristics, including loan demand, we exploit the granularity
of our bank-county level data to include borrower-county ﬁxed eﬀects. Intuitively, these
ﬁxed eﬀects enable us to compare two banks with diﬀerent exposures that lend to the
same county, mitigating concerns that risk-taking is driven by changes in borrower-county
fundamentals (Khwaja and Mian, 2008; Jim´enez et al., 2014). We still ﬁnd a statistically
and economically signiﬁcant eﬀect of exposure on lending standards when we enrich our
speciﬁcations with borrower-county ﬁxed eﬀects.

The relaxation of lending standards among exposed banks suggests an increase in
credit risk, with potentially negative consequences for ﬁnancial stability. To investigate
this aspect in more detail, we show that banks with higher exposure to aging counties see
a signiﬁcantly stronger increase in their share of nonperforming loans during the Great
Recession. Importantly, controlling for banks’ exposure to the rise in house prices prior to
the Great Recession does not aﬀect our estimates. Exposure to aging counties had eﬀects
on risk-taking above and beyond banks’ exposure to the housing boom. Moreover, our
ﬁndings hence suggest that the aging-induced relaxation in lending standards negatively
aﬀects ﬁnancial stability during downturns.

Having established a strong association between population aging and bank risk-
taking, we investigate the underlying channels that could explain the link. Population
aging could aﬀect banks through changes in the supply of and demand for capital. On
the one hand, Becker (2007) argues that seniors are more likely to save in the form of
deposits, which are a stable and cheap source of funding (Hanson et al., 2015; Carletti
et al., 2021). Higher exposure to aging counties could hence lead to deposit inﬂows and
reduce banks’ cost of funds, translating into an increase in lending but allowing banks to
pursue safer projects with lower returns. On the other hand, an aging population could
reduce the local demand for credit and depress returns. Homeownership rates and savings

3Banks could have opened branches between 1997 and 2007 in counties where they had no branch in
1997, possibly mitigating informational frictions in the lending process, leading to a smaller increase in
LTI ratios. Consistent with this interpretation, we ﬁnd that estimated coeﬃcients increase in magnitude
when we focus on counties where banks had no branches in 1997 and did not open any branches during
the sample period.

4

are highest among seniors, and they are less likely to start new companies (Azoulay et al.,
2020). An aging-induced decline in the labor force also reduces ﬁrms’ marginal product
of capital, further lowering the demand for capital (Auclert et al., 2021). Aging-exposed
banks could hence be confronted with a decline in the demand for credit in counties
where they have branches at a time when they experience an increase in available funds.
Banks might therefore have to look for new and potentially riskier clients, in particular
in counties where they operate no branches.

We ﬁrst investigate the link between aging and deposits. We ﬁnd that an increase in
the number of seniors in a county has a positive and strongly signiﬁcant eﬀect on local
bank deposits. A rise in a county’s senior population by one-third is associated with an
increase in county-level bank deposits by around 25%. Seniors’ relatively larger share of
wealth held in the form of deposits explains this positive relationship (Becker, 2007). For
identiﬁcation, our regressions absorb all observable and unobservable bank heterogeneity
with bank ﬁxed eﬀects. They also include a large set of county-level control variables.
We hence account for other bank or observable county characteristics that could explain
the rise in deposits. In addition, we show that neither local aging nor bank exposure
predict where banks open new branches prior to our sample period. This mitigates the
concern that banks strategically opened branches to beneﬁt from future deposit inﬂows
in anticipation of local demographic trends.

We then establish that population aging dampens the local demand for credit. First,
we use data from the Survey of Consumer Finances and show that seniors are less likely
to borrow or have outstanding debt compared to younger respondents. These correlations
hold even after controlling for an extensive set of household-level controls. Second, we
decompose mortgage loan growth in each county into supply and demand factors, follow-
ing Amiti and Weinstein (2018). Higher growth among seniors has a signiﬁcant negative
eﬀect on the demand factor, suggesting that aging leads to a decline in the local demand
for mortgages.

The aging-induced deposit inﬂows and weaker local demand for credit aﬀect the geog-
raphy of bank lending. Higher exposure leads banks to increase their mortgage lending.
The increase in lending is especially large in counties where banks operate no branches,
i.e., in counties where exposed banks are not directly aﬀected by an aging-induced de-
cline in credit demand. These results speak directly to our ﬁnding that banks relax their
lending standards by most in counties where they operate no branches. They also add
to concerns that banks exposed to aging markets may reach for yield outside their core

5

markets (IMF, 2019).

To examine the robustness of our ﬁndings, we perform a series of additional tests. We
start by investigating how the eﬀect of aging on risk-taking changes along the LTI distri-
bution. We ﬁnd that the eﬀect is stronger in the right tail of the LTI ratio distribution,
suggesting higher risk-taking among borrowers that already had high LTI ratios. We also
show that the risk-taking in no-branch counties is stronger in the right tail of the LTI
ratio distribution. In line with the large literature documenting that banks with lower
capital ratios engage more in risk-taking, we further ﬁnd that higher exposure leads to
a signiﬁcantly higher increase in LTI ratios for low-capitalized banks. Next, we consider
the share of denied loans as another measure of bank lending standards. Similar to our
main results, we ﬁnd that exposure to aging counties reduces the share of denied loans
and that the eﬀect is stronger in no-branch counties.

Finally, we also investigate whether laxer lending standards in the form of loan-to-
income ratios aﬀect household leverage. The results show that counties in which exposed
banks have a larger ex-ante market share also see a stronger increase in household debt-
to-income ratios over the sample period. That is, the increase in risk-taking and loan-to-
income ratios at the bank-county level is mirrored in an increase of households’ debt-to-
income ratios at the county level.

To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the ﬁrst to investigate the eﬀects of popula-
tion aging on lending standards, and to what extent there are spillovers across markets.4
While this paper’s focus is on risk-taking, our paper builds on work that shows how
changes in banks’ deposit base aﬀect their loan volumes. Becker (2007) uses the local
demographic structure as an instrument for changes in bank deposits, but focuses on how
the availability of deposits aﬀects local entrepreneurial activity. Gilje et al. (2016) provide
evidence that banks exposed to local liquidity inﬂows from oil and natural gas shale dis-
coveries subsequently increase lending in other counties where they have branches. They
ﬁnd that the eﬀects are especially pronounced for loan types that are subject to more
contracting frictions.5 Our novel results for population aging show that local aging not

4Recent papers investigate the eﬀects of population aging on various outcomes. Butler and Yi (2021)
investigate the eﬀect of an aging population on the U.S. municipal bond market. Kopecky and Taylor
(2022) use historical panel data to show that demographic shifts are correlated with asset returns and risk
premia. Cravino et al. (2022) show that US population aging accounted for about 20% of the increase
in the service share in consumption.

5For further papers on the eﬀects of local shocks on bank lending, see Cort´es and Strahan (2017);
Smolyansky (2019); De Jonghe et al. (2020); Doerr and Schaz (2021) and Rehbein and Ongena (2021),
among many others. In addition, Kundu et al. (2022) demonstrate that the geographic concentration of

6

only leads to deposit inﬂows, but also reduces the local demand for credit. The combi-
nation of both forces explains why banks increase their risk-taking, and why there are
spillover eﬀects to other no-branch markets.

We also contribute to the literature that explores how banks adjust their lending
standards during credit booms (Berger and Udell, 2004; Dell’Ariccia and Marquez, 2006;
Mendoza and Terrones, 2008; Dell’Ariccia et al., 2012; Justiniano et al., 2019) and periods
of low interest rates (Maddaloni and Peydr´o, 2011; Altunbas et al., 2014; Jim´enez et al.,
2014; Ioannidou et al., 2015; Dell’Ariccia et al., 2017; Heider et al., 2021). These papers
show that credit booms or periods of low interest rates can lead to laxer lending standards
and a higher risk of ﬁnancial crises. However, evidence on the eﬀects of population aging
on bank risk-taking is scarce, despite the signiﬁcant policy attention devoted to this major
macroeconomic trend (CGFS, 2018; ECB, 2018; IMF, 2019; OECD, 2019). Our analysis
aims to ﬁll this gap in the literature. As advanced economies face an unprecedented
increase in the number of seniors over the next decade, the bank risk-taking channel of
population aging could gain in importance for ﬁnancial stability.6

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our main data sources
and the construction of the main variables. Section 3 explains the empirical strategy and
presents our main results on risk-taking and ﬁnancial stability. Section 4 then investigates
the underlying mechanism. Section 5 provides additional tests, and Section 6 concludes.

2 Data and descriptive statistics

This section explains the construction of our main variables and reports descriptive statis-
tics. Table OA1 in the Online Appendix provides further details on variable deﬁnitions
and sources.

Our main analysis focuses on the period from 1997 to 2007, for three reasons. First,
while the growth in the senior population has been even more pronounced after the
Great Financial Crisis, the post-crisis period is characterized by substantial ﬁnancial
regulatory reform (such as the Dodd-Frank Act and regular stress tests) and encompassing
government programs. These reforms have shaped banks’ lending decisions, particularly
mortgage lending, over the post-crisis period, which would make a clean identiﬁcation of

deposits aﬀects how shocks are transmitted across geographies by multi-market banks.

6We thereby also complement results in Drechsler et al. (2021), Lin (2020) and Doerr et al. (2021)
by highlighting an alternative channel through which macroeconomic changes aﬀect the ﬁnancial sector.

7

the respective channels through which population aging aﬀects bank risk-taking diﬃcult.
The absence of major ﬁnancial regulatory changes during our sample period makes it
well-suited to identify the eﬀects of population aging on bank risk-taking. Second, we
can exploit the Great Recession to analyze whether higher risk-taking in the years leading
up to the crisis manifested itself in higher nonperforming loans during the shock episode.
That is, we can analyze whether laxer lending standards had an impact on ﬁnancial
stability. And third, we avoid the zero lower bound on interest rates (Leahy et al., 2022).

2.1 Main variables

Population aging. Our main explanatory variable at the county level is the change in
the log of the population of ages 65 and above from 1997 to 2007, denoted by ∆oldc. We
use the change in the number of seniors (i.e., in the level) rather than the change in the
ratio of seniors to the total population (i.e., in the share), because changes in the share
could be driven by changes in the numerator or denominator. For example, a decline
in the total population of a county would lead to an increase in the share of seniors,
even though the number of seniors does not change.
In such a case, the relationship
between e.g. deposits or loans and the change in the share of seniors would be driven by
the decline in population.7 Detailed population data by age cohort are provided by the
National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program.
We use these data also to construct changes in the size of other age cohorts.

Bank exposure. To calculate banks’ exposure to aging counties, we use data from the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s (FDIC) Summary of Deposits (SOD), which
provides information on the geographic distribution of bank deposits.8 We compute

7In regressions of the log of the share of seniors on the log of the total number of seniors (the
numerator) and the log of the total population (the denominator), a Shapley decomposition of the R-
squared shows that around two-thirds of the variation in the share is explained by the variation in the
total population, and around one-third by the variation in the senior population. Using the share of
seniors as an explanatory variable would hence lead to signiﬁcant measurement issues, as most of the
variation would be due to changes in the total population. Instead, we directly control for population
growth in our regressions.

8An assumption underlying our analysis is that deposits raised by banks in a given county are raised
from residents of that county. Amel et al. (2008) show that between 1992 and 2004, the median distance
between a depositor and its bank was three miles and remained constant over time. Nonetheless, the
rise of online banking could mean that “branchless” deposits are recorded in the bank’s headquarters
branch. To the extent that the amount of branchless deposits is uncorrelated with bank exposure, such
measurement error would arguably not lead to a bias in the estimates. In line with this argument, we
ﬁnd that excluding banks’ headquarter county from the analysis does not aﬀect our results (unreported).

8

banks’ beginning-of-sample exposure as

exposureb =

(cid:88)

c

depositsb,c
depositsb

× ∆oldc,

(1)

where depositsb,c and depositsb denote bank b’s deposits in county c and its total deposits
as of 1997. ∆oldc is county c’s change in the log of the population of ages 65 and
above. High exposureb implies that a large share of banks’ initial deposits is held in
aging counties, while low exposure implies that deposits are held in counties with a small
increase in the number of seniors. Higher exposure thus corresponds to an increase in
deposit-weighted average aging in banks’ borrower counties. Exposure is constructed from
beginning-of-sample deposit shares, alleviating concerns about banks selectively opening
branches in aging counties.9

Instrumental variable strategy. Counties that experience a stronger increase in se-
niors could diﬀer along other dimensions that could matter for deposit growth. We thus
predict ∆old, i.e., the change in the population of ages 65 and above from 1997 to 2007,
with the change in the population of age 45 to 65 from 1977 to 1987 in the same county.
In essence, we use the predetermined component of each county’s age structure − 20 years
prior to our sample period − as an instrumental variable for the actual change in the
age structure. This approach builds on the assumption that the historical demographic
structure is plausibly exogenous to changes in contemporaneous confounding factors. For
example, it purges ∆old from changes in life expectancy, in- or out-migration, or incomes
over the sample period.

Similar to county aging, bank exposure could be correlated with other (unobservable)
factors that aﬀect bank behaviour. For example, aging counties could, for whatever
reason, face better economic prospects in terms of their unemployment trajectory or
income growth. Banks more exposed to aging counties would then also be more exposed
to faster growing areas, which poses a threat for our identiﬁcation strategy. To address
this concern beyond the ﬁxed eﬀects strategy (explained below), we construct exposure
in Equation (1) based on ∆old predicted by the historical demographic structure.
In
addition, and to test whether exposure to aging counties is correlated with exposure to
counties with better growth trajectories, we compute exposure to the changes in local

9In the Online Appendix, we show that neither local aging nor bank exposure predict in which

counties banks open new branches prior to 1997, see Table OA3.

9

unemployment rates and income per capita, analogous to Equation (1). We obtain a
strong ﬁrst stage, with an F-statistic of almost 60 (see also Figure OA2).

LTI ratios, loan and deposit growth. Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data provide
detailed information on banks’ residential mortgage lending.10 HMDA covers the vast
majority of applications and approved mortgage loans in the U.S. The data include the
application outcome (granted or denied), loan amount, and borrower income for each
loan.11 We measure bank risk-taking through the loan-to-income (LTI) ratio, deﬁned as
loan volume over applicant income. The LTI ratio is a signiﬁcant predictor of ex-post
default (Fuster et al., 2021) and has been widely used in the literature to measure the
riskiness of loans (Dell’Ariccia and Marquez, 2006; Dell’Ariccia et al., 2012; Duchin and
Sosyura, 2014). We compute the change in the average LTI ratio, as well as at the 10th,
25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th percentile in each bank-county cell:

∆LT Ib,c =

LT I 07
(LT I 07

b,c − LT I 97
b,c
b,c + LT I 97
b,c)/2

.

(2)

Additionally, we compute the change in the share of denied applications in each bank-
county cell. For these measures of risk-taking, we are restricted to the ‘intensive margin’,
in the sense that we can only take into account counties in which banks made loans in
1997 and 2007.

Further, we compute the change in loan amounts and deposits at the bank-county

level as

∆yb,c =

y07
b,c − y97
b,c
b,c + y97
(y07
b,c)/2

,

(3)

where y is either HMDA loans or deposits. For our mortgage analysis, we use mortgage
loans that were not sold in the respective calendar year. Since these loans are mostly
retained on banks’ balance sheets, they are predominately funded by deposits (Han et al.,
2015; Cort´es and Strahan, 2017). To account for entry into and exit out of counties over
the long time horizon, we standardize the change in variables by their respective mid-

10We follow the literature and restrict the sample to conventional or Federal Housing Administration
(FHA)-insured loans, exclude multi-family properties, and keep only originated, approved, and purchased
loans. We also drop all observations with missing county Federal Information Processing Standards
(FIPS) codes or missing borrower income, as well as loans extended to borrowers residing outside of
metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs).

11In 2007, mortgage lending averaged around 30% of banks’ total lending, and 40% for the largest
banks. Additionally, HMDA data represent the most detailed publicly available data on bank lending
disaggregated at the geographical level, which is why we focus on mortgage lending in our analysis.

10

points. This deﬁnition bounds growth rates to lie in the interval [−2, 2], where −2 implies
that a bank exited a county between 1997 and 2007, and 2 that it entered.12 Finally,
we deﬁne the dummy no branch that takes on a value of one if bank b had no branch in
county c in 1997 and zero otherwise.

Bank and county data. The FDIC provides detailed bank balance sheet data in its
Statistics on Depository Institutions (SDI). We collect 1997 second quarter data on banks’
total assets, Tier 1 capital ratio, nonperforming loans (NPL), return on assets, total
deposits, total liabilities, share of non-interest out of total income, and overhead costs
(eﬃciency ratio). We also include an indicator of an institution’s primary specialization
in terms of asset concentration that takes on ten distinct values.13 We also collect 1997
and 2007 data on banks’ total deposits, total liabilities, and total loans and compute the
change in the logarithm of each variable.

At the county level, we further collect public information on debt-to-income ratios
(Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer Credit Panel, available from 1999 on-
ward). We also collect 1997 data on the log of the population (NCI SEER), the unem-
ployment rate (Bureau of Labor Statistics, Local Area Unemployment Statistics (BLS
LAUS)), log income per capita (Bureau of Economic Analysis, Local Area Personal In-
come (BEA LAPI)), house price indices (Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA)), as
well as employment shares in manufacturing (SIC code 20), retail trade (SIC code 52),
and services (SIC code 70), provided in the County Business Patterns (CBP). CBP also
provide information on employment in tradable and nontradable industries. Following
Adelino et al. (2015), we classify two-digit NAICS code 23 as construction; codes 44, 45,
and 72 as nontradable, and all others as tradable industries.

To remove outliers, we winsorize all variables at the 0.5th and 99.5th percentile. We
then trim all remaining extreme values that lie at least ﬁve standard deviations above or
below the mean.

12While the log diﬀerence is symmetric around zero, it is unbounded above and below, and does not
easily aﬀord an integrated treatment of entry and exit. The growth rate used in this paper is divided by
the simple average in t − 1 and t. It is symmetric around zero, lies in the closed interval [-2,2], facilitates
an integrated treatment of entry and exit, and is identical to the log diﬀerence up to a second order
Taylor series expansion (Davis and Haltiwanger, 1999).

13The indicator reﬂects, for example, whether a bank has an agricultural or a mortgage lending

specialization.

11

Survey of Consumer Finances. The Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) of the
Federal Reserve provides detailed information on the allocation of households’ ﬁnancial
assets. The SCF is a triennial cross-sectional survey on household assets and demograph-
ics. We combine the survey waves from 1998 and 2007 (41,366 observations). We collect
information on respondents’ total ﬁnancial assets, deposits, and debt, as well as dummy
indicators for whether they borrowed in the past year, had any outstanding debt, or
whether they have been turned down for credit, or feared being denied credit in the past
5 years. As control variables, we further use data on the education level, number of kids,
gender, race, marital status, home ownership, and a dummy for business ownership.

2.2 Descriptive statistics

In the average county, the number of seniors (∆oldc) increased by 12%,14 with a standard
deviation of 15%. These numbers suggest signiﬁcant variation in population aging across
U.S. counties.

Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the main variables.

In total, our sample
includes 1,843 banks for which we have data on loans and deposits over the sample
period. Panel (a) summarizes bank exposure and other balance sheet characteristics from
the SDI. For the average bank, exposure equals 0.10, with a standard deviation of 0.11.
As exposure reﬂects deposit-weighted aging, a mean of 0.10 implies that the number of
seniors increased by 10% in the average county where a bank takes deposits.15

Panel (b) reports summary statistics at the bank-county level. The average bank saw
little change in its LTI ratio, but there is sizeable dispersion in the change across banks,
the standard deviation equals 85 pp. While LTI ratios at the 25th percentile declined
by 19 pp, LTI ratios increased by more than 5 pp on average at the 75th percentile,
and by more than 20 pp at the 90th percentile. The share of denied loans increased by
7 pp on average. For the average bank-county pair, deposits increased by 114% over
the time period (13,086 observations); mortgage lending (one- to four-family residences)
increased by 103% (53,197 observations).16 Along the intensive margin (disregarding
bank entry and exit across counties), lending increased by 84% (17,643 observations). 17

14The unweighted county average of 11.6% in the change in the number of seniors compares to a

US-wide increase in the senior population of around 10% over the sample period.

15Figure OA1 shows the distribution of aging and exposure to aging.
16The diﬀerence in the number of observations reﬂects that the average bank lends to counties in

which it does not raise deposits.

17The unweighted average increase in mortgage lending in our sample is lower than the ﬁgure based

12

Finally, panel (c) reports summary statistics for county-level variables for the set of 2,163
counties.

Balancedness. To examine the balancedness in beginning-of-sample covariates among
our sample of banks, in Table 2 we split banks into those below (low exposure) and
above (high exposure) the median of the exposure distribution. High-exposure banks are
slightly smaller (the diﬀerence in size is signiﬁcant at the 10% level). They are statistically
similar in terms of the share of nonperforming loans, return on assets, capital ratio, ratio
of deposits to liabilities, or eﬃciency ratio (reﬂecting overhead costs).18 There is also no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the share of C&I loans or the share of loans extended to no-branch
counties.

A potential concern for identiﬁcation is that banks strategically opened branches to
beneﬁt from future deposit inﬂows in anticipation of demographic trends. In the Online
Appendix, we show that neither local aging nor bank exposure predict in which counties
banks open new branches prior to 1997 (see Table OA3). Speciﬁcally, we regress diﬀerent
measures that indicate whether banks opened branches on population aging or bank
exposure and ﬁnd no systematic relationship. These results mitigate concerns about
such selection eﬀects.

3 Population aging and bank risk-taking

The unprecedented rise in the senior population has led to a debate on whether population
aging leads to a build-up of risks in the ﬁnancial sector. High savings rates among
seniors might lead to an abundance of savings and depressed returns, thereby potentially
encouraging banks to reach for yield and engage in risk-taking (IMF, 2019). Higher risk-
taking by ﬁnancial institutions in turn could give rise to ﬁnancial instabilities (Brookings,

on aggregate outstanding mortgage debt (one- to four-family residences) that increased by around 190%
from 1997 to 2007. See Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, FRED series MDOTP1T4FR.

18A potential concern arising from the correlation between bank size and exposure is that the estimates
of exposure on bank lending and risk-taking reﬂect (unobservable) bank characteristics correlated with
bank size. To address this concern, we estimate regressions with granular bank size*county ﬁxed eﬀects,
where bank size corresponds to deciles of 1997 total bank assets. We thus account for any unobservable
factors, including loan demand, that could diﬀer across counties and be speciﬁc to banks of diﬀerent
sizes. In other words, we compare the eﬀect of bank exposure to aging counties on lending and risk-taking
among banks of near-identical size active in the same county. None of our results are aﬀected by the
inclusion of bank size*county ﬁxed eﬀects.

13

2019). In this section, we ﬁrst analyze the eﬀect of population aging on banks’ loan-to-
income ratios and non-performing loans. In the next section, we explore the underlying
mechanism that drives the link between population aging and risk-taking.

3.1 Population aging and lending standards

To investigate the eﬀects of an aging population on bank risk-taking, we estimate the
following regression at the bank-county level:

∆LT Ib,c = β ∆ exposureb + controlsb/c + θc + (cid:15)b,c,

(4)

where ∆LT Ib,c is the change in bank b’s average LTI ratio in mortgage lending in county
c over the sample period. Variable exposureb is bank exposure to aging counties at the
beginning of the sample, as deﬁned in Equation 1. Bank controls include log total assets,
return on assets, nonperforming loans, total deposits over total liabilities, Tier-1 capital
ratio, non-interest income, the indicator on bank specialization, and overhead costs, all
at the beginning of the sample period. County controls include the change in the log of
the total population, as well as the unemployment rate, log income per capita, the share
of blacks, the log of the population, and the employment shares in manufacturing, retail,
and services, also all at the beginning of the sample period. Standard errors are clustered
at the bank and county level to account for correlations across observations among the
same bank or county.

Equation (4) faces the common identiﬁcation challenge to account for diﬀerences in
the underlying characteristics of banks’ borrowers. If more exposed banks lend to counties
with diﬀerent characteristics than less exposed banks, any observed diﬀerential change
in LTI ratios reﬂects both county (demand) and bank (supply) factors. To address this
challenge, we include granular borrower-county ﬁxed eﬀects (θc) that absorb any unob-
servable county characteristics, for example, changes in consumption, employment, or
loan demand. Under the assumption that loan demand in a county is similar across
banks, these ﬁxed eﬀects diﬀerence out demand forces and allow for identiﬁcation of sup-
ply eﬀects. Intuitively, these ﬁxed eﬀects enable us to compare two banks with diﬀerent
exposure that lend to the same county (Khwaja and Mian, 2008; Jim´enez et al., 2014).

Table 3 reports the regression results for Equation (4) and shows that an increase in
exposure to aging counties leads to higher LTI ratios. Column (1) shows that exposure

14

has a positive eﬀect on bank risk-taking, signiﬁcant at the 1% level. When we add bank
controls in column (2), the coeﬃcient of exposure remains similar in terms of sign, size,
and signiﬁcance. In line with results in Table 2, this ﬁnding suggests that exposure is
not systematically correlated with other observable bank characteristics. Column (3)
accounts for observable diﬀerences across borrower-counties by adding county controls,
and column (4) further tightens identiﬁcation by including borrower-county ﬁxed eﬀects.
Holding all observable and unobservable county characteristics constant, exposure to
aging counties still is associated with a highly signiﬁcant increase in LTI ratios. The
magnitude of the coeﬃcient remains similar to column (2). Banks with a one standard
deviation (sd) higher exposure see a relative increase in their LTI ratio by (0.11 × 0.42 =)
4.6 pp.

Including bank controls, county controls or county ﬁxed eﬀects in columns (2)–(4) does
not materially change the size or signiﬁcance of our coeﬃcients relative to column (1),
despite a substantial increase in the R2. Our results hence suggest that the correlation
between bank exposure and observable bank or unobservable county characteristics is
low, reducing potential concerns about self-selection and omitted variable bias (Altonji
et al., 2005; Oster, 2019).

To support the argument that exposure to aging counties leads to an increase in risk-
taking, column (5) replicates the speciﬁcation in column (4), but uses bank exposure
predicted with exposure constructed from the historical age structure (see Section 2).
Supporting the notion that bank exposure is likely orthogonal to several bank and county
characteristics, the coeﬃcient on exposure remains positive and signiﬁcant at the 1%
level.19 These ﬁndings suggest a causal eﬀect of bank exposure on LTI ratios.

Providing further support for a causal link from exposure to risk-taking, column (6)
additionally controls for banks’ exposure to the changes in counties’ income per capita
and unemployment rate. As discussed above, to the extent that aging counties might
systematically diﬀer in their economic prospects and growth trajectories, these exposure
variables could explain changes in risk-taking and be correlated with exposure to aging
counties. Accounting for these factors, column (6) shows that the coeﬃcient on exposure
declines only slightly in magnitude, but remains signiﬁcant at the 1% level, which supports

19The ﬁrst-stage F-statistic equals 57.97. The coeﬃcient in the IV regression is larger than that in the
OLS regressions, which could suggest that the IV overcomes measurement error in the exposure variable.
Such mismeasurement could arise if, for example, seniors hold deposits in bank branches outside their
residence county (which happens when e.g. snowbirds permanently move from the Great Lakes region
to Florida but leave their deposits in a bank branch up north in the town of origin).

15

the plausible exogeneity of our IV.20

Does the eﬀect of exposure on risk-taking diﬀer in counties where banks have a branch
or not? In column (7), we interact exposure with the dummy no branch, which takes on a
value of one in counties where banks had no branch at the beginning of the sample period.
Results show that banks increase their LTI ratios by signiﬁcantly more in counties where
they have no branch. Column (8) conﬁrms this ﬁnding once we add bank ﬁxed eﬀects
to control for any unobservable bank-level characteristics. Previous work has shown that
a greater borrower distance to the nearest branch requires banks to rely more on hard
information (DeYoung et al., 2008). A greater distance can hence result in a less eﬃcient
screening and monitoring of borrowers, leading to the build-up of risks (Granja et al.,
2018). These considerations suggest that the increase in LTI ratios in counties where
banks have no physical presence could lead to material increases in credit risk.21 We will
investigate this aspect in what follows.

3.2 Do laxer lending standards result in higher credit risk and

losses?

The analysis in the previous section has shown that banks with higher exposure to aging
counties increase their LTI ratios, which suggests an increase in credit risk. Did the
increase in credit risk have consequences for the performance of exposed banks during a
negative shock, and hence for ﬁnancial stability more broadly?

Evidence from the Great Recessions suggests so: Figure 1, panel (a) shows the evo-
lution of the ratio of nonperforming 1–4 family residential loans to assets from 2000 to
2015 for banks in the bottom (black dashed line) and top tercile (blue solid line) of the
exposure distribution. Panel (b) depicts the same plot for overall nonperforming loans as
a share of assets. Up until 2007, the series for high- and low-exposure banks are indistin-
guishable. After 2007 NPLs increase to a larger extent for high-exposure banks, relative

20Formally testing for the sensitivity of the exclusion restriction following Conley et al. (2012) shows
that even if the exclusion restriction would be substantially violated – i.e., the past demographic structure
has a large and signiﬁcant eﬀect on the outcome variables during the sample period through channels
other than contemporaneous aging – exposure leads to an economically sizeable and statistically signiﬁ-
cant increase in LTI ratios (unreported).

21Banks could have opened branches between 1997 and 2007 in counties where they had no branch
in 1997, possibly mitigating informational frictions in the lending process. Consistent with this inter-
pretation, we show that the coeﬃcient on the interaction term exposure × no branch increases in size
when the dummy no branch takes on a value of one in counties where banks had no branches in 1997
and opened no branches until 2007 (see Table OA5).

16

to low-exposure banks. The diﬀerence across series peaks in 2010 and only reverts to sim-
ilar levels by 2015. Figure 1 thus suggests that high exposure banks fared worse during
the Great Recession, relative to low exposure banks. However, there was no discernible
diﬀerence in pre-trends, i.e., greater risk-taking did manifest itself in higher NPL ratios
only once the economy entered a downturn.

To investigate the eﬀects of exposure on nonperforming loans in more detail, we

estimate bank-level regressions of the following form:

∆yb = β exposureb + δ exposure to ∆hpi97−07

b

+ controlsb + (cid:15)b,

(5)

where yb is the 2007 to 2010 change in the ratio of nonperforming residential mortgages
loans (1–4 family homes) to total assets or the ratio of overall nonperforming loans to total
assets. Exposure denotes bank exposure to aging counties, predicted by the historical
demographic structure. Bank controls include the log of total assets, return on assets,
nonperforming loans, total deposits over total liabilities, Tier-1 capital ratio, non-interest
income, the indicator on bank specialization, and overhead costs, all as of 1997. To ensure
that our ﬁndings do not reﬂect that exposed banks are also more exposed to the pre-crisis
housing boom, we construct banks’ exposure to the change in county-level house price
indices (‘hpi’) from 1997 to 2007 (exposure to ∆hpib) analogously to Equation 1.
In
bank-level regressions, we can no longer control for possible confounding factors at the
county level, so it is important to keep in mind that the coeﬃcient β could at least in
part reﬂect unobservable demand factors.

Column (1) of Table 4 shows that exposed banks see a signiﬁcant increase in their
NPL ratio on residential mortgage loans. Controlling for banks’ exposure to the housing
boom in column (2) does not aﬀect the coeﬃcient on exposure in any statistically or
economically meaningful way. Columns (3) and (4) repeat the exercise, but use the
change in banks’ total NPL ratio as the dependent variable. Similar to columns (1) and
(2), there is a strong positive and highly signiﬁcant relationship: exposed banks see a
stronger rise in nonperforming loans. In column (4), a one standard deviation increase
in exposure is associated with an almost 13% stronger growth in nonperforming loans
during the Great Recession (around 18% of the average growth in NPLs). While columns
(1) and (2) directly follow from our main ﬁnding − exposed banks increase their provision
of mortgage loans and increase their LTIs − ﬁndings in columns (3) and (4) suggest that
risk-taking in mortgage lending had repercussions on overall bank performance during
the crisis.

17

In conclusion, results in Table 3 suggest that banks exposed to aging counties increase
their loan-to-income ratios, likely taking on credit risk. The eﬀects are more pronounced
in counties where banks have no physical presence – implying geographic spillover eﬀects
of population aging on ﬁnancial stability. Table 4 shows that the aging-induced increase
in risk-taking before the Great Recession led to a sharper increase in nonperforming
loans during the crisis. Exposure to aging counties could therefore have exacerbated the
negative eﬀects of the Great Financial Crisis on bank health and ﬁnancial stability –
irrespective of banks’ exposure to the housing boom.

In what follows, we explore the underlying mechanisms that drives the link between

population aging and bank risk-taking.

4

Inspecting the mechanism: deposits and local loan

demand

As we show in this section, banks operating in aging counties are subject to two opposing
forces that aﬀect their risk-taking behaviour. First, population aging leads to an increase
in banks’ available funding in the form of deposits. Second, an aging population reduces
the local demand for credit.

4.1 Aging and deposits

Seniors have a higher propensity to hold deposits (Becker, 2007), consistent with a lower
portfolio share of risky assets among older households (Fagereng et al., 2017). Panel (a)
of Figure 2 plots average ﬁnancial assets (left axis) and average deposits (right axis) for
diﬀerent age cohorts. Seniors, deﬁned as the population of age 65 and above, hold on
average about twice as much deposits as those in the cohort of 55-64, and more than three
times as much as younger cohorts. Table OA2 in the Online Appendix shows that the
positive relationship between age and deposits is not explained by cohort ﬁxed eﬀects,
nor by a large set of individual-level controls such as income, occupation, homeownership
or education.

Such diﬀerences in deposit holdings across age cohorts imply potentially large eﬀects
on banks’ funding conditions when economies age, as deposits are a safe and cheap source

18

of funding (Kashyap et al., 2002; Hanson et al., 2015; Carletti et al., 2021).22 Moreover,
deposits by customers that have a longer relationship with a bank have been shown to be
more stable (Iyer and Puri, 2012; Iyer et al., 2016) – which is the case for senior citizens.23
Deposit inﬂows due to exposure to aging counties could hence be an important factor in
explaining banks’ risk-taking behavior.

Building on demographic variation in savings behavior, we investigate the relationship
between secular changes in local demographics and bank deposits in the following cross-
sectional regression at the bank-county level:

∆depositsb,c = β ∆oldc + controlsb/c + θb + (cid:15)b,c,

(6)

where ∆depositsb,c is the change in bank b’s deposits in county c over the sample period.
The explanatory variable ∆oldc is the change in the log county population of ages 65 and
above. Due to a possible correlation between local aging and other county-level factors,
we instrument ∆oldc with the historical demographic structure, as explained in Section 2.
Note that we focus on the change in the number of seniors, rather than the share, to avoid
that results are spuriously driven by changes in the total population (see the discussion
Instead, we control for the change in the total population directly.24
in Section 2.1).
County controls include the unemployment rate, log income per capita, the share of
blacks, the log of the population, the change in the total population as well as employment
shares in manufacturing, retail, and services, all at the beginning of the sample period.
Bank controls include the log of total assets, return on assets, nonperforming loans,
total deposits over total liabilities, Tier-1 capital ratio, non-interest income, the indicator
on bank specialization, and overhead costs, all at the beginning of the sample period.
Standard errors are clustered at the bank and county level to account for correlations
across observations among the same bank or county.

In Equation (6), a coeﬃcient β > 0 would indicate that local aging leads to an increase
in local bank deposits. The underlying intuition is that the elderly hold more deposits,

22In 1997 the average bank in our sample had a ratio of deposits to total liabilities of 94%. A large

literature highlights the importance of deposits for bank lending (see e.g. Gilje et al. (2016)).

23According to the Survey of Consumer Finances, respondents of age 65 and above are almost twice
as likely than younger cohorts to state that they chose their ﬁnancial institution because they “banked
there a long time”.

24Consider how aging could aﬀect bank deposits. While aging is expected to have a positive eﬀect
on deposits (see Becker (2007) and the discussion in Section 4), measuring aging by the change in the
share of seniors can spuriously generate a negative inﬂuence, due to a decline in total population – the
denominator of the share.

19

as shown in Figure 2. Yet, β reﬂects diﬀerences in households’ savings behavior and in
bank behavior, both of which could aﬀect individuals’ incentives to hold deposit. For
example, banks could decide to oﬀer more attractive rates on deposits. To isolate the
eﬀect of aging on deposits, in some speciﬁcations, we include bank ﬁxed eﬀects (θb) that
absorb all unobservable bank characteristics. In essence, we compare the eﬀect of aging
in diﬀerent counties on deposits of the same bank, as we hold all bank characteristics
constant.

Table 5 shows that an increase in the number of seniors in a county increases bank
deposits. Column (1) includes county controls and shows that aging has a positive eﬀect
on bank deposits, signiﬁcant at the 1% level. Once we add bank controls in column (2),
the coeﬃcient is similar in terms of sign, size, and signiﬁcance. While we cannot include
depositor-county ﬁxed eﬀects in Equation (6), in column (3) we include depositor-state
ﬁxed eﬀects to control for confounding factors at the state level. The coeﬃcient on ∆ old
declines in magnitude, but remains positive and signiﬁcant at the 1% level.

In column (4), we further tighten identiﬁcation and include bank ﬁxed eﬀects. Holding
all observable and unobservable bank characteristics constant, local aging still is associ-
ated with a highly signiﬁcant increase in deposits. Banks operating in a county with a one
standard deviation (sd) larger increase in the number of seniors see a relative increase
in local deposits by (0.15 × 0.640 =) 9.6% (or around 8.4% of the average growth in
deposits over the sample period). These results suggest a causal eﬀect of local aging on
bank deposits. To further support this interpretation, column (5) additionally controls
for the 1997–2007 change in counties’ income per capita and unemployment rate (note
that regressions already account for the change in the total population). In principle,
diﬀerences in economic prospects could aﬀect deposits and be correlated with popula-
tion aging. Accounting for these factors, column (5) shows that the coeﬃcient on ∆old
remains positive and signiﬁcant at the 5% level.25

4.2 The local demand for credit

Beyond the positive eﬀect on deposits, an aging population could reduce the local demand
for credit. Seniors usually own their property and have high savings, so they have less need
to borrow. In addition, seniors are also signiﬁcantly less likely to start new companies

25In unreported regressions we show that higher exposure increases banks’ total deposits and total
liabilities. This suggests that banks do not oﬀset the increase in deposits with a reduction in other
liabilities.

20

(Azoulay et al., 2020), further dampening the demand for credit.26 Consistent with
lower demand for credit by seniors, Figure 2, panel (b) shows that older cohorts have
signiﬁcantly lower debt levels than younger cohorts (left axis). For the cohort of age
65 and above, total debt is close to zero. The share of respondents stating that they
‘currently do not borrow’ (right axis) also reﬂects this: While around 5% of younger
cohorts state that they did not borrow, almost every third respondent of age 65 and
above reports that he or she did not borrow.

We conﬁrm these diﬀerences in borrowing behavior with respondent (i)-level data

from the SCF. We estimate the following regression:

yi = β respondent age 65i + controlsi + τt + (cid:15)i.

The independent variable respondent age 65i is a dummy with a value of one if the
respondent is of age 65 and above, and zero otherwise. Table 6 shows results. In columns
(1)–(2), the dependent variable is a dummy that takes on a value of one if a respondent
indicated that he/she has not borrowed over the past year. Column (1) shows that
seniors are 20.9% more likely not to have borrowed, compared to younger respondents.
Adding an extensive set of household-level controls (the log of total ﬁnancial wealth, the
education level, number of kids, gender, race, marital status, home ownership, and a
dummy for business ownership), as well as survey wave ﬁxed eﬀects, narrows the gap
only slightly in column (2). We obtain similar results when we use a dummy that takes
on a value of one if a respondent indicated that he/she has no outstanding household
debt in columns (3)–(4). For example, column (4) suggests that seniors are around 36%
less likely to have any debt, compared to younger respondents. In principle, infrequent
borrowing and no outstanding debt could also result from supply factors, e.g. age-speciﬁc
discrimination by ﬁnancial institutions that leads to higher denial rates. To investigate
this explanation, columns (5)–(6) use a dummy for whether a respondent indicated that
he/she has been turned down for credit or feared being denied credit in the past 5 years.
Results show that seniors are signiﬁcantly less likely to have been turned down for credit,
which is consistent with the argument that seniors’ demand for credit is lower than that

26Further, an increase in the number of seniors leads to a decline in the labor force participation
rate. As ﬁrms’ marginal product of capital increases in the amount of available labor, a fall in the
supply of labor reduces ﬁrms’ demand for capital (Auclert et al., 2021). Several studies argue that aging
contributes to slower growth and reduces investment opportunities (Fernald and Li, 2019). Maestas
et al. (2016) and Gagnon et al. (2016) provide state-level evidence for the U.S. that aging leads to lower
growth, mainly due to declining labor productivity. Aksoy et al. (2019) show a negative eﬀect of aging
on growth for a sample of OECD countries.

21

of younger respondents.

To provide further evidence that an increase in the number of seniors reduces the
local demand for credit, we decompose mortgage loan growth in each bank-county cell
into supply and demand factors, following Amiti and Weinstein (2018). To do so, we start
from the following equation: ∆HM DA = αc + βb + εc,b, where the dependent variable
is the growth in the amount of all mortgages originated by bank b in county c. The
borrower-county demand channel is captured by αc, while βb denotes the bank supply
channel. As described in Amiti and Weinstein (2018), this equation implies an adding up
constraint that makes it possible to recover αc, and βb through a weighted least squares
regressions, with weights given by the beginning-of-period share of total loans of bank
b originated in county c over total loans originated in county c. For our regressions, we
aggregate