BIS Working Papers 
No 1100 

Getting up from the floor  

by Claudio Borio 

Monetary and Economic Department 

May 2023 

JEL classification: E42, E43, E52, E58. 

Keywords:  monetary  policy  operating  procedures, 
central  bank  balance  sheets,  abundant  vs  scarce 
reserves systems. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIS  Working  Papers  are  written  by  members  of  the  Monetary  and  Economic 
Department of the Bank for International Settlements, and from time to time by other 
economists,  and  are  published  by  the  Bank.  The  papers  are  on  subjects  of  topical 
interest and are technical in character. The views expressed in them are those of their 
authors and not necessarily the views of the BIS. 

This publication is available on the BIS website (www.bis.org). 

©  Bank for International Settlements 2023. All rights reserved. Brief excerpts may be 

reproduced or translated provided the source is stated. 

ISSN 1020-0959 (print) 
ISSN 1682-7678 (online) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Getting up from the floor1  

Claudio Borio 
Head of the BIS Monetary and Economic Department 

Abstract 

Since  the  Great  Financial  Crisis,  a  growing  number  of  central  banks  have  adopted 
abundant reserves systems (“floors”) to set the interest rate. However, there are good 
grounds  to  return  to  scarce  reserve  systems  (“corridors”).  First,  the  costs  of  floor 
systems  take  considerable  time  to  appear,  are  likely  to  grow  and  tend  to  be  less 
visible. They can be attributed to independent features of the environment which, in 
fact, are to a significant extent a consequence of the systems themselves. Second, for 
much the same reasons, there is a risk of grossly overestimating the implementation 
difficulties of corridor systems, in particular the instability of the demand for reserves. 
Third, there is no need to wait for the central bank balance sheet to shrink before 
moving in that direction: for a given size, the central bank can adjust the composition 
of its  liabilities.  Ultimately, the  design of  the  implementation system should  follow 
from a strategic view of the central bank’s balance sheet. A useful guiding principle is 
that its size should be as small as possible, and its composition as riskless as possible, 
in a way that is compatible with the central bank fulfilling its mandate effectively. 

Keywords:  monetary  policy  operating  procedures,  central  bank  balance  sheets, 
abundant vs scarce reserves systems. 

JEL codes: E42, E43, E52, E58. 

1  

This  paper  was  published  as  SUERF  Policy  Note,  no  311.  It  is  an  extended  version  of  the  keynote 
speech  delivered  at  the  workshop  “Beyond  unconventional  policy:  Implications  for  central  banks’ 
operational frameworks“,  hosted  by  the Netherlands Bank  in Amsterdam on 10  March 2023. I am 
very grateful to Aerdt Houben for inviting me to give that speech. I would also like to thank Morten 
Bech, Ulrich Bindseil, Stijn Claessens, Piti Disyatat, Robert McCauley, Bill Nelson, Francesco Papadia, 
Andreas  Schrimpf,  Masaaki  Shirakawa  and  Nikola  Tarashev  as  well  as  workshop  participants  for 
comments and very valuable discussions. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those 
of the BIS. 

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 

The Great Financial Crisis (GFC) has been a watershed for the way in which central 
banks set the short-term interest rate on a day-to-day basis. The crisis has literally 
upended  these  operating  procedures.  Is  the  change  desirable  or  should  it  be 
reversed? 

The  question  may  appear  inconsequential,  at  least  at  first  sight.  After  all,  why 
should it make a big difference? All that matters, it could be argued, is at what level 
the rate is set, not how it is set. Indeed, while things have changed somewhat in recent 
years,  a  keen  interest  in  operating  procedures  remains  generally  limited  to  central 
bankers and the market participants most directly concerned, particularly those active 
in money markets. 

This  limited  interest,  while  understandable,  is  regrettable.  For  operating 
procedures shed light on the great power that central banks wield, as well as on the 
source of that power and on its limits (Borio (1997)). Moreover, they also have broader 
implications for the functioning of money and even capital markets, for how monetary 
policy spreads its influence through the financial system, for central bank emergency 
interventions at times of financial stress and for the optimal size and structure of the 
central bank’s balance sheet. 

Against this backdrop, this paper assesses the post-GFC sea-change in operating 
procedures. It does so from the perspective of someone who has studied them in the 
past and sees current developments with a mix of surprise and some discomfort. My 
hope is that the analysis will make it clear that the discomfort is not just a matter of 
unjustified nostalgia. 

More specifically, the paper examines the relative merits of abundant reserves 
systems (ARS) and scarce reserves systems (SRS) in implementing interest rate policy. 
This  is  what  has  typically  been  referred  to,  somewhat  inaccurately,  as  the  relative 
merits of floor versus corridor systems. That said, the analysis will also address more 
briefly the bigger and closely related debate over the size and composition of the 
central bank’s balance sheet.  

The key takeaway is that it is worth giving serious thought to returning to SRS – 

“getting up from the floor”, as it were.  

The  first  section  summarises  the  post-GFC  sea-change.  The  second  explains  it 
might be desirable to reverse course. The third considers the broader question of the 
central bank’s balance sheet. The conclusion summarises the key messages. 

The sea-change 

The  common  features  of  pre-GFC  operating  procedures  were  very  clear.  The 
overriding objective was to make the policy stance effective while at the same time 

2 

 
 
 
leaving  a  minimal  imprint  on  the  financial  system.  This  gave  rise  to  three,  tightly 
related, characteristics.2 

First, there was a single operating target at the very short end of the curve, almost 
invariably an overnight rate.3 This rate, in effect, captured the overall monetary policy 
stance – in technical terms, it was a sufficient statistic for that stance.  

Second,  the  “decoupling  principle”  ruled.  Signalling  did  the  heavy  lifting  in 
steering  the  overnight  target.  Through  signals,  the  central  bank  would  tell  banks 
where  it  wanted  the  overnight  rate  to  be.4  In  the  meantime,  light-touch  liquidity 
management  operations  worked  only  in  the  background.  They  would  keep  the 
market  for  bank  reserves  in  balance  and  ensured  that  the  demand  for  settlement 
balances “did not get in the way”.5 Importantly, the operations were designed not to 
disturb  market  prices.6  The  rest  of  market  rates  then  aligned  seamlessly  with  the 
overnight rate and expectations thereof. Of course, the central bank could pull off this 
magic signalling “trick” – often little appreciated by non-specialists – because of its 
monopoly over the supply of banks’ settlement balances and its ability to set features 
of the demand for them, such as the terms on reserve requirements (eg averaging 
and remuneration).  

Third, SRS were the rule and ARS very much the exception. An SRS system is here 
defined as one that ensures that the overnight rate is above the interest rate on bank 
reserves (possibly zero); and an ARS as one where that interest rate (or zero) is the 
binding  “floor”  for  the  overnight  rate  –  typically  implemented  through  a  deposit 
facility.7 More precisely,  in an SRS, the  factor  determining  the  overnight rate  is  the 
demand  for  reserves  for  settlement  purposes  (“settlement  balances”),  possibly 
constrained by reserve requirements with averaging provisions. By contrast, in an ARS 
reserves exceed that amount. The handful of central banks that had an ARS – in fact, 

2  

3  

4  

5  

6  

7  

For a detailed and systematic comparison of operating procedures at the time, see Borio (1997) and 
(2001). The procedures did not change significantly until the GFC, when adjustments started to be 
made (Borio and Nelson (2008)). Ho (2008) compares operating procedures in selected countries in 
Asia.  For  a  short  overview  of  current  systems,  see  Cap  et  al  (2020)  and  the  Markets  Committee 
Compendium on the BIS website: www.bis.org/mc/compendium.htm.    

The  Swiss  National  Bank  was  an  exception,  as  it  targeted  three-month  Libor,  given  the  structural 
features of the money market. 

The critical importance of signalling in practical implementation is lost in standard formal models of 
operating  procedures,  where  control  of  the  overnight  rate  is  portrayed  as  a  vertical  supply  curve 
hitting a smooth and well behaved downwards-sloping demand curve. Compare, for instance, Borio 
(1997) and Borio and Disyatat (2010), Bindseil (2004) and Woodford (2000) with Bech and Monnet 
(2013).  In  the  latter  class  of  models,  which  have  become  increasingly  standard,  signalling  has  not 
much of a role to play and liquidity management operations do the bulk of the work. Borio (1997) 
also includes a detailed discussion of the role of averaging provisions and their link with signalling. 
See also Friedman and Kuttner (2010).   

This essentially meant offsetting the impact of autonomous factors on the supply of reserves and 
possibly  smoothing  out  the  demand  for  settlement  balances  themselves,  through  eg  reserve 
requirements with averaging provisions. 

This definition of the “decoupling principle” is not used to refer to the possibility of adjusting the 
amount of reserves and the policy rate/operating target independently, which is a property of a floor 
system.  

This does not mean, though, that the overnight rate will necessarily be at the floor. In particular, it 
may be below – floors may “leak” (see below). Many central banks had no deposit facility in the past, 
with the Federal Reserve pre-GFC being a case in point. 

3

 
 
 
 
 
only  two  (New  Zealand  and  Norway),  at  least  among  advanced  economies  –  did 
satiate the demand for settlement balances, but only marginally.  

To be sure, beneath these similarities, differences abounded – think of them as 
“a  hundred  ways  to  skin  a  cat”  (Borio  (2001)).  But,  looking  back,  the  similarities 
prevailed. And those differences made hardly any difference. 

Operating procedures were simple and tidy.  

Fast-forward to today and the sea-change is obvious, at least in several AEs. In 

many respects, the current features are the mirror image of the pre-GFC ones.  

First,  central  banks  can  no  longer  capture  the  policy  stance  with  a  single 
(overnight) operating target. Because of their large-scale asset purchases and special 
lending schemes, they have extended their direct influence well beyond the overnight 
segment. 

Second, gone is the decoupling principle. Liquidity management operations are 
an  integral  part  of  the  policy  stance.  And  when  central  banks  tried  to  rescue  the 
principle  as  they  started,  or  considered  starting,  to  unwind  their  balance  sheets,  it 
proved  very  hard.  Recall  how  shrinking  the  balance  sheet  was  supposed  to  be  “as 
boring as seeing paint dry”. Well, it has not been.  

Third, many central banks have adopted ARS. In several cases reserves are much 
larger  than  any  conceivable  liquidity  needs.  As  a  result,  they  are  no  longer  just  a 
payments  or  settlement  medium  but  also  a  store  of  value,  competing  with  other 
assets in terms of remuneration. 

We know the reason for the shift: the huge and unsterilised increase in central 
bank balance sheets, which was designed to ease further the policy stance at the zero, 
or effective, lower bound or to address financial stress. Large scale asset purchases – 
often  termed,  too  loosely, quantitative  easing  (QE) – have accounted  for  the  lion’s 
share of the increase.8 As a result, central bank balance sheets have reached levels 
previously seen only in wartime.9 

The sea-change has gone hand in hand with another remarkable development – 
widespread  market segmentation. Gone  is  the  seamless  alignment  of  market  rates 
with the (uncollateralised) overnight rate: some arbitrage relationships in overnight 
and term money market segments have seemingly broken down.10  

In some cases, though, the main counterpart was increases in foreign exchange reserves – large-scale 
purchases in foreign currency-denominated assets – which are another form of balance sheet policy 
(Borio  and  Disyatat  (2010)).  This  is  more  common  in  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs);  among 
advanced economies, the Swiss National Bank is an example. 

For those countries that had adopted ARS pre-GFC, the motivations were different. In the case of 
Norway, it was the impact of huge and unpredictable autonomous factors, in the form of government 
balances with the central bank. In that of New Zealand, the reasons were more “philosophical”, ie 
following Friedman’s principle that if producing money is costless, then its opportunity cost should 
be zero. See also Goodfriend (2002) for an advocate of this implementation approach.  

See  eg  Duffie  and  Krishnamurthy  (2016)  on  how  dispersion  across  money  market  rates  due  to 
segmentation hampers the pass-through efficiency of policy rate changes. See Borio et al (2016) and 
Rime et al (2022) on how the frictions in money markets spill over to FX swap markets and contribute 
to violations in covered interest parity (CIP). 

8  

9  

10  

4 

 
 
 
 
Examples  abound.  Market  rates  may  languish  below  the  deposit  facility  rate  – 
“floors may leak”. Collateralised rates may hover well below uncollateralised ones, by 
an amount that exceeds any possible difference in credit risk – a symptom of collateral 
scarcity. And some spreads that used to be stable may now be more volatile.  

Continue or reverse course? 

Where do we (or should we) go from here? In talking to central banks, the impression 
is that they are becoming used to ARS. ARS have become a kind of “New Normal”, 
linked to larger central bank balance sheets. 

There are essentially four arguments for retaining ARSs. 

Argument one: the floor system does its job. The central bank does manage to 
control the overnight rate with the desired degree of precision, in both good and bad 
times.11  To  be sure,  the  degree  of  control  may  not  be  perfect.  But the  rate  hovers 
roughly where the central bank would like to see it and its volatility is generally low 
and acceptable. Simply put, if it ain’t broken, why fix it. 

Argument two: in the New Normal, it would be hard to implement an SRS. This 
is because the demand for reserves has become less predictable. Sometimes, there 
may be tensions and spikes in the overnight and other closely related market rates, 
such as the repo rate. The money market ructions in September 201912 are the most 
notorious example: they showed that, despite very large reserves, there was no excess 
after  all. As  a  result,  central  banks  have  been  cautiously testing the  waters  as  they 
unwind their balance sheets.   

Various  reasons  have  been  put  forward  to  explain  this  unpredictability  in  the 
demand  for  reserves.  Central  banks  have  broadened  the  set  of  counterparties, 
including central clearing counterparties (CCPs).13 There is greater segmentation in 
the  (secured  and  unsecured)  interbank  market  and  probably  beyond.  Importantly, 
new prudential liquidity requirements are now in place: settlement balances, possibly 
constrained by reserve requirements, are no longer the only factor determining the 
need for deposits with the central bank. It is as if these deposits now have to obey 
two masters: the monetary authority and the prudential authority.    

Argument  three:  abundant  reserves  have  the  additional  benefit  of  supporting 
financial  stability.  Regardless  of  prudential  requirements,  they  provide  banks  with 
ample liquidity buffers. Moreover, if one believes that there is a scarcity of safe assets, 
then bank reserves are an additional source of supply.14 

11  

12  

13  

14  

In general, the desired degree of precision and acceptable deviations can vary, depending on the 
specifics of the system and broader aspects of the financial system. For a discussion, see Borio (1997) 
and (2001). 

For  a  more  detailed  analysis  of  this  episode,  see  eg  Avalos  et  al  (2019),  Afonso  et  al  (2021)  and 
Copeland et al (2022). 

See, for example, the case of the United Kingdom (Hauser (2019)).  

For an elaboration of this view, see Greenwood et al (2016).  

5

 
 
 
 
 
Argument four: regardless of the relative merits of the system, the question of 
which system to adopt is rather premature. No reason to think about changing, at 
least now. In some jurisdictions, it will take a long time to reduce central bank balance 
sheets. 

No doubt, these arguments have merit. But they are not that compelling. Take 

each in turn. 

Argument  one:  the  system  has  indeed  “worked”  in  sense  that  it  has  yielded 

control over the overnight rate. That said, it has not come without costs.  

Directly or indirectly, these costs reflect a key factor: reserves have also become 
a  store  of  value.  In  the  process,  the  central  bank  has  switched  off  the  signalling 
mechanism of control: now it is liquidity management operations that do all the heavy 
lifting. Moreover, the central bank has taken over much of the intermediation in the 
overnight  interbank  market.  As  a  result,  many  of  the  unwelcome  features  of  the 
financial landscape that we may be tempted to treat as exogenous may well be, to a 
significant extent, endogenous, ie the consequence of the ARS system itself. 

Three types of cost are worth highlighting. 

One  is  that  the  ARS  kills  the  overnight  interbank  market  (Graph  1).  And  the 
damage  can  easily  extend  beyond  the  overnight  tenor:  if  banks  expect  to  have 
sufficient liquidity also in the future, it is not obvious why they should trade with each 
other for funding purposes beyond the overnight segment either.15,16 The damage is 
long-lasting.17  If  you  don’t  use  a  muscle,  it  atrophies.  Desks  are  dismantled. 
Institutional memory withers. In the meantime, not just the total amount of reserves, 
but their distribution begins to matter.  

The  consequences  are  material.  For  one,  this  raises  the  likelihood  of  tensions 
when  reserves  need  to  circulate  freely, as  we  saw  in  the US markets  in September 
2019. As a result, it will require the central bank to increase its injections of liquidity 
to calm markets at times of stress, ultimately magnifying moral hazard.18 In addition, 
there is a risk of a ratchet effect: the longer the ARS stays in place, the greater the 
demand for reserves can become.19 Variants of such concerns have led the Central 

15  

16  

Potter (2016), for instance, argues that the function of the overnight segment is simply to redistribute 
reserves linked to arbitrary payment patterns. As such, it does not perform a useful economic function 
and, on top, it absorbs capital by increasing the size of banks’ balance sheets as they borrow and 
lend to each other.      

Killing the overnight market has also raised challenges for the shift to new benchmark rates following 
the  Libor  scandal,  as  these  rates  require  active  trading  (Schrimpf  and  Sushko  (2019)).  One  more 
specific implication is the pressure to have a benchmark rate determined in a market in which non-
banks also participate. This, in turn, may indirectly be one reason for extending access to the central 
bank balance sheet to them. See also below.     

17   On this, see also the report by the Markets Committee (2019).  

In  this  context,  Selgin  (2019),  for  instance,  stresses  the  importance  of  interbank  monitoring  as  a 
disciplining  factor;  Furfine  (2001)  provides  evidence  based  on  the  (uncollateralised)  overnight 
segment. See also Cœuré (2013). 

See, for instance, Nelson (2022) and, for a reference to this possibility, Åberg et al (2021). In a similar 
vein, Acharya et al (2022) argue that large excess reserves induce banks to create commitments on 
them: the supply of liquidity generates its own demand. 

18  

19  

6 

 
 
 
 
Graph 1

EUR bn 

200

160

120

80

40

0

Bank of Norway and the Swiss National Bank to take half a step back and adopt tiered 
floor systems and absorb reserves.20    

Excess liquidity and the decline in interbank money market activity 

Federal Reserve 
USD bn 

  Eurosystem 

USD bn  

EUR bn 

3,400

2,550

1,700

850

0

Lhs:

Rhs:

340

255

170

4,000

3,200

2,400

1,600

85

800

0

0

03

05

07

09

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

03

05

07

09

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

Excess reserves

Unsecured interbank volume (EFFR)

Lhs:

Rhs:

Excess reserves

Unsecured interbank volume (EONIA)
Secured volume for funding purposes (GC pooling)

The vertical line in the left-hand panel indicates the start of reserve remuneration by the Federal Reserve, which marked the switch to a floor
system. The market for the effective federal funds rate includes participants that are not eligible to receive interest on reserves. The vertical 
line in the right-hand panel corresponds to when EONIA converged to the deposit facility rate, when excess reserves rose as a result of the
Eurosystem’s Public Sector Purchase Programme (PSPP).  

Sources: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; Bloomberg; BIS. 

A  second,  closely  related,  cost  is  the  distortions  that  the  ARS  system  can 
introduce in markets. It can contribute to collateral scarcity: after all, only banks can 
use reserves. Collateral scarcity has been an issue in the euro area.21 Moreover, it can 
contribute to price anomalies, such as leaking floors. As the overnight rate hits the 
floor, the impact of segmentation due to institution-specific features increases. Given 
no or little trading among banks, new players become the marginal ones, de facto 
setting the interest rate. Think, for instance, of those institutions in the United States 
that have access to central bank deposits but are not eligible for interest on them.  

But the issue is more general. Once reserves become a store of value, they 
can trigger pervasive, possibly unpredictable waves across relative yields in the 
financial system. The reason is that the amount exogenously set by the central 
bank must be willingly held at the exogenously set interest rate.22 As the excess 
increases, to the extent that banks find reserves costly – eg because they crowd 

20  

21  

22  

In these systems, reserves are remunerated only up to a pre-determined amount and the central bank 
keeps the supply of reserves close to that point. This induces a certain amount of interbank trading, 
whenever some banks are beyond the threshold and others below it. On Norway, see Central Bank 
of Norway (2021); on Switzerland, see Maechler and Moser (2022).   

For a discussion of these issues, see eg Arrata et al (2020), Schaffner et al (2019). 

Indeed, these are precisely the types of effect discussed in Tobin and Brainard (1969), where an open 
market operation exchanges a government debt for a zero-yielding monetary base.    

7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out more profitable investments, such as by consuming capital – attempts to get 
rid of them will put downward pressure on other yields. 

Depending on country-specific features, the downward pressure could reach 
uncomfortable levels, possibly to the point of calling for further adjustments to 
the framework. This is especially the case at times when banks are reluctant to 
grow their balance sheet – its “price” is high. Non-banks would look for alternative 
investment  opportunities,  most  likely  pushing  down  the  rates  on  the  closest 
substitutes, such as reverse repo rates.23 In addition to the critical role of more 
structural  factors,24  this  may  help  explain  the  sharp  downward  spikes  on  repo 
rates in the euro area at quarter ends and the utilisation of the new reverse repo 
facility in the United States – a kind of safety valve.25   

One can look at it another way. In an SRS, where the demand for reserves is 
purely for settlement purposes, and signalling does the heavy lifting, the impact 
of the implementation framework is limited to the corresponding overnight rate. 
The decoupling principle reigns. In an ARS, the impact cannot be contained in the 
same way. Paraphrasing Jeremy Stein, excess liquidity gets in all the cracks (Stein 
(2013)).  

A third type of cost is of a more political economy nature. It is the perception 
that the central bank “subsidises” banks.26 The central bank can then become an 
easy target for criticism, as is already the case, especially if banks are reluctant to 
offer more attractive rates to depositors. After all, why should they if they have 
plenty of liquidity, so that they are less pressed for funds, and if their capital, and 
hence lending capacity, is absorbed by an unwanted item on their balance sheet? 
This  subsidy  question  is  part  of  a  broader  concern  with  central  bank  financial 
results. 

Argument two: it is hard to imagine that, because of instability in the demand 
for  reserves,  an  SRS  would  be  more  difficult  to  operate  than  in  the  past  –  or, 
perhaps one should say, not as easy. The overwhelming majority of central banks 
around the world are still operating such a system and without difficulties. This is 
so  even  when  they  have  large  balance  sheets,  mainly  reflecting  holdings  of 
foreign exchange reserves, as in many EMEs. And, of course, they are operating 
the  systems  following  the  implementation  of  the  new  Basel  III  prudential 
requirements. Some of the concerns may simply reflect the loss of institutional 

23   On this, see also Markets Committee (2019). 

24   A  pervasive  structural  factor  has  been  changes  in  prudential  regulation  and  supervision, 
internationally and domestically. For a detailed analysis of the US experience, see eg Potter (2017), 
who also explains the rationale for the introduction of the facility in those terms. For a cross-country 
perspective, see CGFS (2015).  

25   A reverse repo facility, if unlimited, would also have broader implications for financial stability, as it 
makes  it  easier  for  runs  on  banks  to  take  place  at  times  of  stress.  The  risk  can  be  mitigated  by 
including some caps. See eg the discussion in Greenwood et al (2016), although there it is couched 
in terms of the choice between commercial paper and RRPs.  

26   De Grauwe and Yi (2023), for instance, stress this point. Tucker (2022) provides a systematic analysis 

of the link between monetary policy operating procedures and public finances.  

8 

 
 
 
 
memory  within  central  banks.  One  can  hear  echoes  of  the  so-called  “fear  of 
floating” regarding exchange rates (Calvo and Reinhart (2002)). 

Why should operating an SRS not be so complicated? Because, arguably, the 
instability in the demand for bank reserves is to an important extent endogenous 
to  the  ARS  itself.  The  previous  analysis  already  identified  two  specific  reasons: 
obstacles to the smooth redistribution of reserves and the risk of a ratchet effect. 
But there is a more general one: the store of value function makes the demand 
for  reserves  sensitive  to  relative  returns,  not  least  those  of  other  short-term 
instruments such as government debt and repos.  

As  an  illustration,  consider  the  case  of  Basel  III’s  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio 
(LCR).  In  the  ratio,  government  paper  and  reserves  are  perfect  substitutes  for 
regulatory  purposes:  banks  can  fulfil  the  requirement  with  either,  without 
constraints. As a result, the demand for reserves becomes very sensitive to the 
spread. This would not be the case in an SRS, in which the central bank would 
steer  market  overnight  rates  to  be  well  above  the  deposit  facility  rate.  The 
opportunity  cost  of  holding  reserves  would  be  too  high  and  the  demand  for 
settlement  balances  would  again  be  the  only  relevant  factor  in  driving  their 
demand at the margin.27 Given the more attractive pricing, banks would fulfil the 
requirement as far as possible with government securities. In effect, we would be 
back in the pre-GFC world.28 

Put  differently,  the  sources  of  uncertainty  in  implementing  an  ARS  and  an 
SRS differ. In an SRS, it is uncertainty about the demand for settlement balances. 
Because  that  demand  is  not  interest-elastic,  effort  is  expended  to  forecast 
autonomous  factors  and  make  them  more  predictable,  and  to  put  in  place 
mechanisms  that  can  limit  the  volatility  of  the  overnight  rate  (eg  reserve 
requirements with averaging provisions). In an ARS, the uncertainty relates largely 
to the demand for reserves as a store of value and hence its impact on the overall 
constellation of relative yields. But, in addition, the uncertainty about settlement 
needs  is  not  eliminated  and  lurks  in  the  background.  It  can  appear  with  a 

27  

28  

To be clear: banks will not be fully indifferent between the two, since settlement balances are superior 
to short-term paper for liquidity purposes, not least owing to settlement lags and possibly valuation 
effects, at least if one considers longer-dated securities (Schnabel (2023). The point is that they would 
not have an incentive to minimise those holdings. See also Filardo (2020). The substantive point is 
that the additional demand, which will depend on potential cash outflows, will not be interest-elastic. 
See  Bech  and  Keister  (2012)  for  a  model  that  incorporates  these  additional  considerations  in  a 
standard analytical framework. 

The  term  “settlement  balances”  here  includes  also  any  precautionary  balances  held  for  prudential 
regulatory purposes. Some supervisors may still prefer that banks retain a minimum of reserves, as 
seems to be the case, for instance, in the United States. If so, and if the amounts held for reserve 
requirements (with averaging provisions) did not qualify, there could still be a supervisory-induced 
demand for reserves. That said, this demand would be interest-inelastic, and central banks should be 
able to estimate it rather easily, including by simply asking. 

9

 
 
 
 
 
vengeance as the central bank seeks to withdraw the excess or tensions in the 
financial system arise. In turn, this can magnify those tensions.29 

Argument three: it is far from obvious that a glut of bank reserves is good for 
financial  stability.  After  all,  short-term  government  paper  and  reserves  are 
reasonably  good,  although  by  no  means  perfect,  substitutes,  for  liquidity 
purposes.30 Accordingly, even those who believe that a shortage of safe assets 
has been a key reason for financial instability would argue that it would be better 
for the central bank to issue its own paper or do reverse repos: the instruments 
could  be  made  available  to  all.31  In  addition,  as  noted  above,  the  atrophy  of 
monitoring  and  trading  muscles  may  actually  require  the  central  bank  to 
intervene  more,  rather  than  less,  intensely  at  times  of  stress.32  And  more 
generally, historically, it has not been a lack of liquidity, but capital erosion, that 
has lurked at the core of banking crises.33         

Argument four: it is not necessary to wait for the central bank balance sheet 
to  shrink  before  moving  towards  an  SRS.  There  is  no  one-to-one  mapping 
between the size of the central bank’s balance sheet and the composition of its 
liabilities. Just look at those EME central banks with huge FX reserves. In fact, size 
and composition can be largely decoupled. There are many tools to shrink the 
reserves for a given balance sheet size, such as through central bank paper or 
time deposits, reverse repos or FX swaps. Each has its pros and cons, depending 
on  the  institutional  context.  But  some  of  them  have  an  additional  merit:  they 
increase the supply of collateral – the “new money” in today’s collateral-based 
financial system.   

Of course, while the absorption of reserves may be gradual to start with, at 
some point the shift to an SRS will have to take place overnight, in a kind of big 
bang. The two systems do not lie along a continuum: the demand for reserves is 
not a smoothly downwards-sloping one, given the nature of settlement balances. 
You either target the overnight rate by signalling (SRS) or you satiate the banks 
with liquidity (ARS). There is no middle ground.  

29  

30  

31  

32  

These  points  are  relevant  when  considering  the  argument  that  an  SRS  is  operationally  more 
burdensome, with reference to the need to forecast autonomous factors and carry out fine-tuning 
operations (eg Potter (2017), Schnabel (2023)). This argument is less compelling to the extent that 
the  broader,  general  equilibrium  complications  and  side  effects  of  an  ARS  materialise  and  are 
considered. 

See Lopez-Salido and Vissing Jorgensen (2023) for a specific perspective on the demand for reserves 
that accounts for a convenience yield of reserves due to banks’ liquidity preferences. See also Afonso, 
Giannone,  La  Spada  and  Williams  (2022)  for  an  econometric  estimation  of  the  demand  for  bank 
reserves that allows for time variation in the relationship. 

For  an  in-depth  discussion  of  these  issues  and  a  proposal,  see  Greenwood  et  al  (2016).  In  fact,  if 
additional  reserves  are  produced  by  buying  a  short-term  security,  given  that  reserves  are  only 
available to banks, from this specific perspective, the operation would not be helpful. 

That said, one effect of ARS is to avoid the need for the central bank to lend – expand its balance 
sheet  intra-day  –  to  oil  the  financial  system,  especially  given  the  tendency  to  throttle  and  delay 
payments. This reduces operational risk. See Bech et al (2019) and Afonso, Duffie, Rigon and Shin 
(2022). 

33  

For a review of some of these issues, see eg Borio (2011). 

10 

 
 
 
 
How could a smooth transition back to an SRS system be engineered? The 
central  bank  would  need  to  put  in  place  safeguards  to  avoid  spikes  and 
undesirable volatility in the overnight rate. It could announce in advance the day 
and time of the shift. It could then set relatively tight bands around the target 
overnight rate through standing facilities (eg, a repo and reverse repo one) and 
absorb  the  excess  reserves.  Over  time,  the  bands  could  then  be  widened,  as 
familiarity  grows  with  the  features  of the  demand for  settlement  balances  and 
with the system.34 

The central bank balance sheet 

Let’s  now  widen  the  focus  and  consider  a  bigger  issue  –  the  central  bank  balance 
sheet.  

One concern is that the wish to keep an ARS ends up dictating the size of the 
central  bank’s  balance  sheet.  The  argument  could  go  as  follows.  The  ARS  system 
requires  the  monetary  authority  to  satiate  the  demand  for  bank  reserves.  At  the 
standing  deposit  facility  rate,  that  demand  could  be  large  and  unpredictable.  As  a 
result, the balance sheet must have a minimum size that is considerably larger than 
in the past.  

This, however, would be the tail wagging the dog. The operating system should 
be  the  outcome  of  a  strategic  view  regarding  the  balance  sheet’s  size  and 
composition. And that view should include risk management as a key consideration. 

Size and composition should be derived from broad principles. A useful starting 
point is that the balance sheet should be as small as possible, and its composition as 
riskless as possible, but no more. “No more” here means that the central bank should 
be able to perform its mandate effectively. In other words, the central bank should 
aim for a “lean” balance sheet.35  

Country-specific  differences  aside,  three  functions  are  part  of  a  central  bank’s 
core  mandate  –  functions  that  will  constrain  the  balance  sheet  size  and  dictate  its 
composition:  underpinning  the  payments  system;  implementing  monetary  policy, 
including aspects linked to the exchange rate (making the stance operational); and 
crisis management, including acting as lender or market-maker of last resort. Except 
perhaps for foreign exchange reserve considerations, none requires a large balance 
sheet in normal conditions. 

There are three benefits of having a lean balance sheet.  

34   Another possible intermediate step that might provide further comfort would be to shift temporarily 
to a tiered system. That said, given the facilities that set the boundaries to the corridor, this is not 
necessary. Importantly, high-frequency volatility in the overnight rate need not be an issue as long 
as the central bank’s signal concerning the desired interest rate is effective, as banks and other market 
participants  would  tend  to  see  through  it.  Central  banks  have  displayed  very  different  degrees  of 
tolerance for this volatility; see Borio (1997) for a more detailed discussion of these issues.   

35  

For a similar view, see Bindseil (2016). 

11

 
 
 
 
 
One is to limit the central bank’s footprint in the financial system and economy 
at large. This would reduce its involvement in resource allocation and also the risk of 
inhibiting  market  functioning.36  A  small  footprint  would  support  a  smoothly 
functioning economy while at the same time reducing the risk of political economy 
pressures, especially those that can easily arise if the central bank gets too involved 
in resource allocation.    

A second, closely related, benefit is to limit the side effects of the link with the 

government’s balance sheet.  

Some of these side effects are of an economic nature. The key one is the impact 
on the fiscal position through central bank remittances. Large-scale asset purchases 
financed with bank reserves greatly heighten the sensitivity of the fiscal position to 
higher interest rates. From the perspective of the consolidated state sector balance 
sheet – government plus central bank – they amount to a large debt management 
operation. Long-term government debt is retired and replaced with debt indexed to 
the overnight rate, ie bank reserves. Back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that, 
for the central banks that have used such purchases more actively, some 30–50% of 
long-term  debt  is,  de  facto,  overnight.37  This  will  show  up  as  lower  central  bank 
remittances to the government and hence lower government revenues. And central 
bank  losses  will  not  just  mean  a  weaker  fiscal  position,  but  they  could  also  raise 
reputational and institutional challenges for central banks.  

Other  side  effects  are  of  a  political  economy  one.38  While  central  banks’ 
performance  should  be  judged  exclusively  on  how  effectively  they  fulfil  their 
mandates and not on their financial results, there is a strong temptation to focus on 
those results (Carstens (2023)). Especially when they make losses, central banks can 
come  under  heavy  criticism,  with  risks  to  their  reputation,  independence  and, 
ultimately,  legitimacy.  A  small  and  risk-proofed  balance  sheet  mitigates  those 
concerns and increases the central bank’s room for policy manoeuvre. Such a balance 
sheet is what avoids blurring the line between monetary and fiscal policy – a form of 
institutional hygiene.  

In this context, there may be a risk of underestimating the side effect of a step 
as apparently innocuous as paying interest on bank (excess) reserves, which opens 
the door to an ARS. Doing so raises the political incentive to take advantage of the 
newly found “captive” investor base, thereby potentially relaxing the government’s 
financing constraint. Banks represent a form of “captive” demand because they must 
accept the amount of reserves the central bank injects into the system through its 
open market operations. With any other instrument that drains reserves, the pricing 
has  to  be  sufficiently  attractive  for  market  participants to  be willing to  lend to  the 
central bank in the first place, which raises the funding cost and difficulties involved 

To  be  sure,  spurring  market  development  –  an  important  consideration  is  some  cases  –  can 
encourage size up to a point. But its main impact is on the composition of the balance sheet. Spurring 
market development is a common consideration in many EMEs. For a historical example involving 
the Federal Reserve and  the market for letters of credit  to encourage the  role of the  US  dollar in 
trade, see Eichengreen and Flandreau (2010).   

See Borio and Disyatat (2021) for a discussion of this point in the broader context of the relationship 
between monetary and fiscal policies.  

For a recent elaboration on this issue, see Bell et al (2023). 

36  

37  

38  

12 

 
 
 
 
(eg  failed  auctions  etc).39  All  this  puts  a  premium  on  institutional  safeguards  that 
protect central bank independence.        

A third, often underestimated, benefit of a lean balance sheet is that it maximises 
the central bank’s ability to expand it when the need does arise. Given the costs of 
large and risky balance sheets, the initial size is a hindrance, not an advantage. The 
balance sheet must be elastic, not large. 

Conclusion 

This paper has argued that there are good reasons to return to an SRS.  

There is a risk of underestimating the costs of ARS or floor systems. The costs 
take a considerable time to appear, are likely to grow and tend to be less visible. They 
can  be  attributed  to  exogenous  features  of  the  environment  when,  in  fact,  those 
features are to a significant extent endogenous – a consequence of the system itself. 

There is equally a risk of grossly overestimating the implementation difficulties 
of  an  SRS.  That  perception,  too,  depends  to  a  considerable  extent  on  some 
problematic features of the environment that would disappear once an SRS is put in 
place – the instability in the demand for reserves being the key one. Not surprisingly, 
the  overwhelming  majority  of  central  banks  around  the  world  are  operating  such 
systems, even those with large balance sheets.   

There  is  no  need  to  wait  for  the  central  bank  balance  sheet  to  shrink  before 
moving in that direction. For a given size, the central bank can adjust the composition 
of its liabilities. 

Ultimately,  the  design  of  monetary  policy  operating  procedures  should  follow 
from a strategic view of the right size and composition of the central bank’s balance 
sheet. The principle proposed here is that the size should be as small as possible, and 
its  composition  as  riskless  as  possible,  but  no  more.  “No  more”  here  means 
“consistent with the central bank fulfilling its mandate effectively”. This would limit 
the economic and political economy costs of large and risky balance sheets and, by 
so doing, also maximise the balance sheet’s capacity to expand at times of need. That 
is, it would maximise the balance sheet’s elasticity, which is key. 

To be sure, the analysis has deliberately highlighted a specific perspective and 
glossed over qualifications and country-specific factors. These will of course influence 
the final cost/benefit analysis. But while there may be “a hundred ways to skin a cat”, 
some of those ways may be better than others.  

39   On this, see also Plosser (2018) and Selgin (2019).  

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

Åberg,  P,  M  Corsi,  V  Grossmann-Wirth,  T  Hudepohl,  Y  Mudde,  T  Rosolin  and  F 
Schobert  (2021):  “Demand  for  central  bank  reserves  and  monetary  policy 
implementation  frameworks:  the  case  of  the  Eurosystem”,  ECB  Occasional  Paper 
Series, no 282, September. 

Acharya,  V,  R  Chauhan,  R  Rajan  and  S  Steffen  (2022):  “Liquidity  dependence:  why 
shrinking central bank balance sheets is an uphill task”, proceedings of the Jackson 
Hole  Economic  Symposium  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  on 
“Reassessing Constraints on the Economy and Policy”, August.  

Afonso, G, M Cipriani, A Copeland, A Kovner, G La Spada, G and A Martin (2021): “The 
market  events  of  mid-September  2019,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Staff 
Reports, no 918. 

Afonso, G, D Duffie, L Rigon and H S Shin (2022): “How abundant are reserves? 
Evidence  from  the  wholesale  payment  system”,  BIS  Working  Papers,  no  1053, 
December. 

Afonso, G, D Giannone, G La Spada and J Williams (2022): “Scarce, abundant, or 
ample? A time-varying model of the reserve demand curve”, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, Staff Reports, no 1019. 

Arrata, W, B Nguyen, I Rahmouni-Rousseau and M Vari (2020): “The scarcity effect 
of  QE  on  repo  rates:  evidence  from  the  euro  area”,  Journal  of  Financial 
Economics, vol 137, no 3, pp 837–56. 

Avalos, F, T Ehlers and E Egemen (2019): “September stress in dollar repo markets: 
passing or structural?”, BIS Quarterly Review, December. 

Bech, M and T Keister (2012): “On the liquidity coverage ratio and monetary policy 
implementation”, BIS Quarterly Review, December, pp 49–61.  

Bech, M, A Martin and J McAndrews (2019): “Settlement liquidity and monetary 
policy implementation – Lessons from the financial crisis”, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, Economic Policy Review, pp 1–25.  

Bech, M and C Monnet (2013): “The impact of unconventional monetary policy 
on the overnight interbank market”, in A Heath, M Lilley and M Manning (eds), 
Liquidity and funding markets, proceedings of the 2013 Reserve Bank of Australia 
Conference. 

Bell, S, M Chui, T Gomes, P Moser-Boehm and A Tejada (2023): “Why are central 
banks reporting losses? Does it matter?”, BIS Bulletin, no 68, February. 

Bindseil, U (2004): Monetary policy implementation, Oxford University Press. 

——— (2016): ”Evaluating monetary policy operational frameworks”, proceedings 
of the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City on “Designing resilient monetary policy frameworks for the future”, August. 

Borio, C (1997): “The implementation of monetary policy in industrial countries: a 
survey”, BIS Economic Papers, no 47, July. 

14 

 
 
 
———  (2001):  “A  hundred  ways  to  skin  a  cat:  comparing  monetary  policy 
operating procedures in the United States, Japan and the euro area”, BIS Papers, 
no 9, December, pp 1–22. 

———  (2011):  “Rediscovering  the  macroeconomic  roots  of  financial  stability 
policy:  journey,  challenges  and  a  way  forward”,  Annual  Review  of  Financial 
Economics, vol 3, December, pp 87–117. Also available as BIS Working Papers, no 
355, October. 

Borio, C and P Disyatat (2010): “Unconventional monetary policies: an appraisal”, 
The Manchester School, vol 78, s1. Also available as BIS Working Papers, no 292, 
November 2009. 

——— (2021): “Monetary and fiscal policies: In search of a corridor of stability”, 
VoxEU, 10 November. 

Borio, C and B Nelson (2008): “Monetary operations and the financial turmoil”; 
BIS Quarterly Review, March, pp 31-46.  

Borio, C, R McCauley, P McGuire and V Sushko (2016): “Covered interest parity 
lost: understanding the cross-currency basis”, BIS Quarterly Review, September, 
pp 45-64.   

Calvo,  G  and  C  Reinhart  (2002):  “Fear  of  floating”,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, vol 117, no 2, pp 379–408. 

Cap,  A,  M  Drehmann  and  A  Schrimpf  (2020):  “Changes  in  monetary  policy 
operating procedures over the last decade: insights from a new database”, BIS 
Quarterly Review, December, pp 27–39. 

Carstens, A (2023): “Central banks are not here to make profits”, op-ed, Financial 
Times, 7 February. 

Central  Bank  of  Norway  (2021):  “Norges  Bank’s  liquidity  policy:  principles  and 
design”, Norges Bank Papers, no 21. 

Cœuré,  B  (2013):  “Where  to  exit  to?  Monetary  policy  implementation  after  the 
crisis”,  speech  at  the  15th  Geneva  Conference  on  the  World  Economy:  “Exit 
strategies: time to think about them”, Geneva, 3 May. 

Committee of the Global Financial System (CGFS) (2015): “Regulatory change and 
monetary policy”, CGFS Papers, no 54, May.  

Copeland, A, J Duffie and Y Yang (2022): “Reserves were not so ample after all”, 
Stanford University Graduate School of Business Research Papers, no 4185217.  

De Grauwe, P and Y Ji (2023): “Monetary policies with fewer subsidies for banks: 
A two-tier system of minimum reserve requirements”, VoxEU, 23 March. 

Duffie, D and A Krishnamurthy (2016): “Pass-through efficiency in the Fed’s new 
monetary policy setting”, proceedings of the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium 
of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  on  “Designing  resilient  monetary 
policy frameworks for the future”, September. 

Du, W (2022): “Bank balance sheet constraints at the center of liquidity problems”, 
remarks at the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank 

15

 
 
 
 
of Kansas City on “Designing resilient monetary policy frameworks for the future”, 
August.  

Eichengreen,  B  and  M  Flandreau  (2010):  “The  Federal  Reserve,  the  Bank  of 
England  and  the  rise  of  the  dollar  as  an  international  currency,  1914–39”,  BIS 
Working Papers, no 328.  

Filardo, A (2020): “Monetary policy operating frameworks: are reforms heading in 
the right direction?”, Cato Journal, vol 40, no 2, Spring/Summer, pp 385–407.  

Friedman, B and K Kuttner (2010): “How do central banks set interest rates?”, in B 
Friedman  and  M  Woodford  (eds),  Handbook  of  Monetary  Economics,  vol  3, 
Elsevier, pp 1345–438. 

Furfine, C (2001) “Banks as monitors of other banks: evidence from the overnight 
federal funds market”, Journal of Business, vol 74, no 1, pp 33–5. 

Goodfriend,  M  (2002):  ““Interest  on  reserves  and  monetary  policy”,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, May, pp 1–8.  

Greenwood, R, S Hanson and J Stein (2016): “The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 
and financial stability”, proceedings of the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City on “Designing resilient monetary policy 
frameworks for the future”, August. 

Hauser, A (2019): “Waiting for the exit: QT and the Bank of England’s long-term 
balance  sheet”,  speech  at  the  European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and 
Development, London, 17 July. 

Ho, C (2008): “Implementing monetary policy in the 2000s: operating procedures 
in Asia and beyond”, BIS Working Papers, no 253. 

Lopez-Salido, D and A Vissing-Jorgensen (2023): “Reserve demand, interest rate 
control, and quantitative tightening”, working paper available on SSRN. 

Maechler, A and T Moser (2022): “Return to positive interest rates: why reserve 
tiering?”, Money Market Event, 17 November.  

Markets  Committee  (2019):  Large  central  bank  balance  sheets  and  market 
functioning,  report  prepared  by  a  study  group chaired  by  Lorie Logan  (Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York) and Ulrich Bindseil (European Central Bank) October. 

Nelson, B (2022): “The Fed is stuck on the floor: here’s how it can get up”, Bank 
Policy Institute, 11 January. 

Potter, S (2016): Discussion of U Bindseil “Evaluating monetary policy operational 
frameworks”,  proceedings  of  the  Jackson  Hole  Economic  Symposium  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  on  “Designing  resilient  monetary  policy 
frameworks for the future”, August. 

——— (2017): “Money markets at a crossroads: policy implementation at a time 
of structural change”, remarks at the Master of Applied Economics Distinguished 
Speaker Series, University of California, Los Angeles, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York. 

16 

 
 
 
Plosser, C (2018): “The risks of a Fed balance sheet unconstrained by monetary 
policy”, in M Bordo, J Cochrane and A Seru (eds), The Structural Foundations of 
Monetary Policy, Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, pp 1–10. 

Rime, D, A Schrimpf and O Syrstad (2022): “Covered interest parity arbitrage”, The 
Review of Financial Studies, vol 35, no 11, November. 

Selgin, G (2019): “The Fed’s new operating framework: how we got here and why 
we shouldn’t stay”, Cato Journal vol 39, no 2, pp 317–26. 

Schaffner, P, A Ranaldo and K Tsatsaronis (2019): “Euro repo market functioning: 
collateral is king”, BIS Quarterly Review, December. 

Schnabel, I (2023): “Back to normal? Balance sheet size and interest rate control”, 
speech at an event organised by Columbia University and SGH Macro Advisor, 
New York, 27 March. 

Schrimpf, A and V Sushko (2019): “Beyond Libor: a primer on the new reference 
rates”, BIS Quarterly Review, March, pp 29–52. 

Stein, J (2013): “Overheating in credit markets: origins, measurement, and policy 
responses”,  speech  at  the  research  symposium  Restoring  household  financial 
stability after the Great Recession: why household balance sheets matter, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St Louis.  

Tobin,  J  and  W  Brainard  (1969):  “Pitfalls  in  financial  model  building”,  American 
Economic Review, vol 58, May, pp 99–122.  

Tucker, P (2022): “Quantitative easing, monetary policy implementation and the 
public finances”, IFS Report, no R223. 

Woodford, M (2000): “Monetary policy in a world without money”, International 
Finance, vol 3, pp 229–60. 

17

 
 
 
 
Previous volumes in this series 

1099 
May 2023 

1098 
May 2023 

1097 
May 2023 

Who holds sovereign debt and why it matters  Xiang Fang, Bryan Hardy and Karen 

K Lewis 

Long term debt propagation and real 
reversals 

Mathias Drehmann, Mikael Juselius 
and Anton Korinek 

Dampening global financial shocks: can 
macroprudential regulation help (more than 
capital controls)? 

Katharina Bergant, Francesco 
Grigoli, Niels-Jakob Hansen and 
Damiano Sandri 

1096 
May 2023 

Money Market Funds and the Pricing of 
Near-Money Assets 

Sebastian Doerr, Egemen Eren and 
Semyon Malamud 

1095 
April 2023 

Sectoral shocks, reallocation, and labor 
market policies 

Joaquín García-Cabo, Anna Lipińska 
and Gastón Navarro 

1094 
April 2023 

The foreign exchange market 

Alain Chaboud, Dagfinn Rime and 
Vladyslav Sushko 

1093 
April 2023 

Sovereign risk and bank lending: evidence 
from the 1999 Turkish earthquake 

1092 
April 2023 

Mobile Payments and Interoperability: 
insights from the academic literature 

Yusuf Soner Baṣkaya, Bryan Hardy, 
Ṣebnem Kalemli-Özcan and Vivian 
Yue 

Milo Bianchi, Matthieu Bouvard, 
Renato Gomes, Andrew Rhodes 
and Vatsala Shreeti 

1091 
April 2023 

FinTech, investor sophistication and financial 
portfolio choices 

Leonardo Gambacorta, Romina 
Gambacorta and Roxana Mihet 

1090 
April 2023 

Tackling the fiscal policy-financial stability 
nexus 

Claudio Borio, Marc Farag and 
Fabrizio Zampolli 

1089 
April 2023 

Intraday liquidity around the world 

Biliana Alexandrova Kabadjova, 
Anton Badev, Saulo Benchimol 
Bastos, Evangelos Benos, Freddy 
Cepeda-Lopéz, James Chapman, 
Martin Diehl, Ioana Duca-Radu, 
Rodney Garratt, Ronald Heijmans, 
Anneke Kosse, Antoine Martin, 
Thomas Nellen, Thomas Nilsson, Jan 
Paulick, Andrei Pustelnikov, 
Francisco Rivadeneyra, Mario Rubem 
do Coutto Bastos and Sara Testi 

1088 
April 2023 

Big techs and the credit channel of  
monetary policy 

Fiorella De Fiore, Leonardo 
Gambacorta and Cristina Manea 

All volumes are available on our website www.bis.org. 

 
 
 
