BIS Working Papers 
No 1060 

The burst of high inflation in 
2021–22: How and why did we 
get here? 

by Ricardo Reis 

Monetary and Economic Department 

December 2022 

JEL classification: E58, E50, E31. 

Keywords: Price level, central bank independence, r-star, 
dove, hawk. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIS  Working  Papers  are  written  by  members  of  the  Monetary  and  Economic 
Department of the Bank for International Settlements, and from time to time by other 
economists,  and  are  published  by  the  Bank.  The  papers  are  on  subjects  of  topical 
interest and are technical in character. The views expressed in them are those of their 
authors and not necessarily the views of the BIS. 

This publication is available on the BIS website (www.bis.org). 

©  Bank for International Settlements 2022. All rights reserved. Brief excerpts may be 

reproduced or translated provided the source is stated. 

ISSN 1020-0959 (print) 
ISSN 1682-7678 (online) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreword 

The 21st BIS Annual Conference took place in Basel, Switzerland, on 24 June 2022. 
The event brought together a distinguished group of central bank Governors, leading 
academics and former public officials to exchange views on the topic “Central banking 
after the pandemic: challenges ahead”. The papers presented at the conference are 
released as BIS Working Papers, nos 1060, 1061, 1062 and 1063. 

BIS  Papers  no  131  contains  panel  remarks  by  Lael  Brainard  (Vice  Chair,  Board  of 
Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System),  Stefan  Ingves  (Governor,  Sveriges 
Riksbank) and Eddie Yue (Chief Executive, Hong Kong Monetary Authority).  

WP1060 The burst of high inflation in 2021–22: How and why did we get here? 

i

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 

Foreword ....................................................................................................................................................... i 

The burst of high inflation in 2021–22: How and why did we get here? 

by Ricardo Reis ......................................................................................................................................... 1 

Discussion by Signe Krogstrup  ....................................................................................................... 26 

Discussion by Federico Sturzenegger ........................................................................................... 37 

Previous volumes ................................................................................................................................... 43 

WP1060 The burst of high inflation in 2021–22: How and why did we get here? 

iii

 
 
 
 
 
The Burst of High Inflation in 2021–22:  

How and Why Did We Get Here? 

Ricardo Reis* 
London School of Economics 
June 2022 

Abstract:  The  current  institutional  arrangements  for  monetary  policy  delivered  more  than  two 
decades of low and stable inflation. Yet, central banks failed to prevent a burst of high inflation in 
2021-22.  This  paper  inspects  four  tentative  hypotheses  for  why  this  happened.  The  first  is  a 
misdiagnosis of the nature of shocks during a time of great uncertainty leading to an overly long 
period of expansionary policy. The second is a neglect of expectations data driven by a strong 
belief  that  inflation  expectations  were  firmly  anchored  and  so  inflation  increases  would  be 
temporary. The third is an over-reliance on the credibility earned in the past, creating an illusion 
of  too  much  room  to  focus  on  the  recovery  of  real  activity  and  underpredicting  the  resulting 
inflation. The fourth is a revision of strategy that made central banks tolerant of higher inflation 
because of the trend fall in the return on government bonds, even though the return on private 
capital stayed high.  

* This essay grew out of speeches and lectures given at Markus’ Academy, the 2022 ECB Watchers conference, the 
BIS 2022 annual meetings, the 2022 annual Bradesco/BBI conference, the Norges Bank, the Hoover Institution’s 2022 
Monetary Policy Conference, and the CICC Global Institute. I am grateful to participants at these conferences for 
many  comments,  and  to  Marina  Feliciano,  Brendan  Kehoe,  and  Borui  Zhu  for  research  assistance.  Contact: 
r.a.reis@lse.ac.uk  

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Inflation  in  most  western  advanced  economies  has  been  rising  at  a  fast  pace  since  the 

middle of 2021. It was tempting (and too common) at the time to dismiss this rise in one of two 

ways. During the first half of 2021, some noted that there was a normal catch up of the price level 

after its sharp fall in 2020 during the pandemic. But this correction became a persistent acceleration 

by the second half of 2021, which gained further momentum in the first half of 2022, well beyond 

any  reasonable  catchup.  Another  dismissal  came  from  remembering  how  central  bankers  had 

worried that inflation might be stuck at too low of a level between 2014 and 2019, for instance 

hovering around 1% and 1.5% in the Eurozone. Maybe a year or so of higher than 2% inflation 

was to be welcome. But, in April of 2022, the one-year inflation rate was 9.0%, 6.3%, and 7.5% 

in the United Kingdom, the United States, and the Eurozone, respectively. Quantitatively, inflation 

is so far above target that concerns of the recent past that inflation was too low seemed trivial. 

Policy makers are worried, as they should be. More than a decade ago, Charles Evans, the 

president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the current longest-sitting member of the 

Federal  Open  Markets  Committee,  said  in  a  speech:  “Imagine  that  inflation  was  running  at  5 

percent against our inflation objective of 2 percent. Is there a doubt that any central banker worth 

their salt would be reacting strongly to fight this high inflation rate? No, there isn’t any doubt. 

They would be acting as if their hair was on fire” (Evans 2011). Today, the reality of inflation is 

already well beyond Evans’ imagination, and some central bankers are feeling the heat in their 

heads. How did we get to this dramatic situation?  

The following discussion puts forward four factors behind the recent rise in inflation. The 

guiding framework is the principle that, ultimately, monetary policy can control inflation. That 

control is far from perfect, coming with unavoidable misses, and often it is desirable to let inflation 

deviate from 2% for some time to try to meet other objectives. But, common to all four factors, is 

2 

 
 
a presumption that inflation rose because monetary policy became used to a state of affairs in the 

past  decade  and  took  too  long  to  shift  its  stance.  Rather  than  highlighting  isolated  mistakes  in 

judgment, I point instead to underlying forces that created a tolerance for inflation that persisted 

even after the deviation from target became large. These factors suggest reforms for the future, as 

well as ways to put out the fire. Perhaps they are of use to the central bankers proving that they are 

worth their salt. I focus the discussion and the references on the ECB and the Federal Reserve, 

although the points apply more broadly to other central banks in advanced economies. 

The Context: 25 Years of Price Stability 

Before looking at what happened in 2021–22, it is important to step back, and recall how 

exceptional  the  previous  three  decades  had  been.  Between  1995  and  2020,  almost  every  major 

advanced economy enjoyed a remarkable period of price stability. I first produced a version of 

figure  1  in  2017  for  a  conference  discussing  the  twenty  years  of  independence  of  the  Bank  of 

England. It shows eight centuries of inflation in the United Kingdom, split into 20-year periods for 

which I computed the average and the standard deviation of inflation. Eight hundred years is a 

long  time,  and  it  included  many  experiments  with  monetary  policy:  from  the  gold  standard  to 

floating exchange rates, with monetarism and Bretton Woods thrown in the mix. Some of them 

got close to the recent past in terms of achieving an average inflation rate near 2%, but they had 

much higher volatility. A few had low volatility, but those came with persistent deflation. None 

worked as well in delivering low and stable inflation as the regime of the last twenty years. Never 

had monetary policy been so successful at controlling inflation as it had been in the two decades 

before the pandemic (Miles et al, 2017). 

3 

 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Eight Hundred Years of Inflation in the United Kingdom, 1217 to 2016 

n
o
i
t
a
l
f
n
I

f
o

y
t
i
l
i
t
a
o
V

l

15%

1317–36

1377–96

1697–1716

1417–36

10%

1537–56

1217–36

1337–56
1237–56

1357–76

1517–36

1277–96
1257–76

1437–56

1557–76

1297–1316

1797–1816

1497–1516

1757–76

1917–36

1397–1416

1577–96

1637–56

1457–76

1477–96

1597–1616

1837–56
1617–36
1737–56

5%

1717–36

1817–36

1657–76

1677–96

1857–76

1777–96

1897–1916

1957–76

1977–96

1937–56

1877–96

1997–2016

−3%

−2%

−1%

0%

2%

1%
CPI inflation

3%

4%

5%

6%

Notes: Data on the annual change in the Consumer Price Index, from the Millennium dataset of the Bank of England, 
grouped in twenty-year intervals. Horizontal axis has the absolute value of average inflation during twenty years minus 
2%. 

What does this successful regime consist of? In my view, it is based on three pillars. The 

first is granting central banks independence from the Ministry of Finance, so that managing the 

public debt and helping to balance the public finances is no longer a job for monetary policy, and 

no  longer  overrides  concerns  about  inflation.  It  is  also  important  to  have  independence  from 

governments seeking re-election so that monetary policy is not systematically used to stimulate 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
the  economy  temporarily,  a  pursuit  that  often  proves  fruitless  but  results  in  high  and  volatile 

inflation. 

The second pillar is the required balance to the first: for a public institution to have the 

power that we confer upon central bankers, then its mandate must be narrow, its actions transparent, 

and its performance measurable and routinely measured. The public has given central banks an 

inflation target that satisfies all these criteria. 

The third pillar is the primacy of interest rates as the main tool of monetary policy, set in 

transparent  and  predictable  ways.  For  most  of  this  time,  the  interest  rate  was  a  short-term  rate 

closely controlled by the central bank, but the period after the great financial crisis saw central 

banks  “go  long”  by  pursuing  policies  that  would  temporarily  steer  long-term  interest  rates  in 

government bonds. Throughout, central bankers followed clear principles—like the Taylor rule or 

gradualism—that made their actions rule-like in allowing the private sector to understand where 

policy was heading and why. 

There  are  endless  debates  on  whether  these  three  pillars  are  necessary  or  sufficient  to 

deliver price stability. But it is unlikely it was a coincidence that inflation was so low and stable 

in a whole host of countries that followed these same three pillars, at different times and in different 

circumstances. I raise them because I fear that in the near future valid criticisms of central bankers' 

choices in the last year, or understandable outrages at how high and persistent inflation becomes, 

can lead to overreactions and entirely new regimes that come with volatility and may fail. The last 

twenty years showed that independent central banks setting interest rates to hit inflation targets 

can succeed. The water may need some cleaning or some change, but the baby should stay in it. 

5 

 
 
The First Factor: Shocks and Misdiagnoses 

The years 2021 and 2022 saw large and unusual shocks hitting the economy. The job of 

central banks was especially difficult, and choices were made amidst great uncertainty on what the 

state of the economy was in real time and what the nature and persistence of the shocks affecting 

inflation were.  

The  first  and  major  shock  was,  of  course,  the  pandemic  of  2020.  At  first,  it  justified  a 

remarkable degree of monetary stimulus since there were legitimate fears of a depression. The 

Federal Reserve announced a schedule of asset purchases that made its balance sheet expand to a 

record  share  of  GDP.  The  ECB  gave  forward  guidance  that  deposit  rates  would  stay  negative 

extending well beyond one year. Perhaps over-influenced by the experience of the great financial 

crisis, many expected long-lasting scars from the Covid recession. Avoiding a slump demanded a 

strong response. 

Instead, the economy rebounded quickly before 2020 was even over. Between the trough 

in 2020Q2 and the end of 2021, real GDP rose by 14.9% in the United States and 17.5% in the 

euro area. The unemployment rate fell by more than 10% in less than twelve months in the United 

States. Instead of scars and hysteresis, the economy showed an ability to intertemporally substitute 

production  and  consumption.  After  the  lockdown  of  the  second  quarter  of  2020,  the  economy 

responded in the third quarter with intense re-opening and economic activity. The private sectors 

became better at this intertemporal substitution with time, and when a larger health shock came at 

the end of 2020 with the delta wave (in number of infections, deaths, or any other health indicator) 

together with new lockdowns, the fall in production was smaller for the euro area, and inexistent 

for  the  United  States.  Figure  2  shows  how  quick,  relative  to  its  depth,  the  recovery  was  in 

comparison  with  the  other  recessions  since  the  start  of  the  century.  Macroeconomic  policy 

6 

 
 
deserves credit for this fast recovery. The social insurance programs of 2020 likely contributed to 

minimizing  the  scars  and  prevented  consumers  from  becoming  persistently  pessimistic  and 

unwilling to work or consume. Almost no bank failed during this time, and there was no significant 

crisis in any relevant financial market.  

Figure 2. The Recovery from Recessions in the United States and the Euro Area 

k
a
e
P
s
u
o
v
e
r
P
o

i

t

l

e
v
i
t
a
e
R
P
D
G

10%

5%

0%

−5%

−10%

−15%

−20%

US 2001 Q4

EA 2013 Q1
EA 2009 Q2
US 2009 Q2

US 2020 Q2

EA 2020 Q2

0

5

10

15

# Quarters from Trough

United States

Euro Area

Notes: Change in real GDP per capita from trough for 4 years afterwards unless a new peak is reached (or the 
present is reached) according to the recession dates of the CEPR-EABCN and the NBER. 

At the same time, the recovery came with inflation. The framework of the Phillips curve 

says that deviation from steady state inflation can come from three direct channels. The first is the 

expected  inflation  by  households  and  firms.  The  second  is  a  deviation  of  real  activity  from  a 

potential level of output that is determined by technology and costs. The third is a markup shock 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
that introduces a gap between the potential and efficient levels of output. While different models 

of  price  stickiness  come  with  different  concrete  causes  behind  each  of  these  three  forces,  this 

organizing  framework  has  repeatedly  been  useful  to  interpret  inflation  dynamics  arising  from 

shocks. 

The fast recovery is an example of the second force driving inflation up. Because tighter 

monetary policy can work through the same force in the opposite direction, it can stabilize the 

output gap and inflation with it. However, monetary policy was kept loose in 2021. Additionally, 

the direct transfers to households and firms in 2020 had led to an accumulation of savings and an 

explosion in broad monetary aggregates that provided the balances for a boom in spending once 

the economy re-opened. The fiscal stimulus at the start of 2021 in the United States (the American 

Rescue Plan of 2021) further raised aggregate demand, likely to a level above the potential output 

of  the  economy.  The  amount  of  fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus  in  2020  was  perhaps  excessive, 

although this judgement comes with the benefit of hindsight. A more pertinent criticism is that 

policy did not reverse course until at least the end of 2021, even as the signs that the fast recovery 

was leading to overheating became clearer. This slow reversal is perhaps best explained by the 

forward guidance given in 2020, serving as a constraint in 2021 on what central banks thought was 

admissible without defrauding expectations. 

A second set of shocks compounded the inflation problem in 2021. They had their origin 

in the supply sector. At different times during the year, ports became clogged, the production of 

microchips  hit  capacity  constraints,  and  global  value  chains  broke  down  as  new  waves  of  the 

pandemic led to a closing of borders. These bottlenecks are shocks to the supply of goods in the 

economy that reflected themselves differently in different countries. Yet, the diagnosis of central 

banks was similar across the advanced economies. In terms of the Phillips curve, policy makers 

8 

 
 
interpreted  all  these  shocks  as  temporary  markup  shocks,  the  third  channel.  As  such,  they 

concluded that they should not reverse the stimulus stance of monetary policy and not jeopardize 

the recovery. The standard monetary policy prescription against a temporary markup shock is to 

let inflation rise above target so that, even if actual output rises above potential, it stays close (or 

slightly below) the efficient level of output. 

This diagnosis was suspect, both at the time and in hindsight. Many of these shocks can 

just as well be interpreted as shocks to the potential level of output. For instance, the problem with 

global supply chains affects the actual technology used to produce goods, not just the market power 

of firms. Moreover, if the shape of globalization is going to change, as some have argued, this will 

most likely affect the productive capacity of the economy. So, if inflation was rising because of 

the  second  channel  through  lower  potential  output,  as  opposed  to  the  third  through  higher 

deviations from the efficient level of output, the policy prescription would be instead to tighten 

monetary  policy  and  to  keep  inflation  on  target.  Simply  put,  persistent  and  recurrent  negative 

supply shocks to potential output will make the economy poorer: inflation cannot change this, nor 

can monetary policy. 

Energy prices were the third shock. They had been rising since 2021, and sharply increased 

in 2022 with the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The ECB responded again as if this was a temporary 

markup  shock,  as  opposed  to  a  shock  to  potential  output.  Policy  tolerated  a  sharp  increase  in 

inflation, predicting it to be short-lived. It was a defensible priority to strive to avoid mistakes of 

the past, when hikes in oil prices would raise inflation, trigger tighter monetary policy, and cause 

a recession. 

Yet this “see through the shock” policy is a prescription of the literature only if inflation 

expectations are anchored. Otherwise, the sharp increase in the prices of energy will have an over-

9 

 
 
sized impact on household expectations as the first channel of the Phillips curve becomes operative, 

further pushing inflation up. Not only did central banks again interpret a supply shock as being a 

shock to markups, as opposed to potential output, but they relied on expectations being anchored. 

Yet, large changes in household costs of energy are salient to households and can easily unsettle 

their expectations. 

Three times in a row in a short period of time, a set of shocks pushed inflation up. Three 

times  in  a  row,  monetary  policy  interpreted  them  using  the  lenses  of  the  Phillips  curve  in  the 

direction  that  concluded  that  monetary  policy  should  be  kept  loose.  Three  times  in  a  row,  this 

diagnosis was plausibly right but disputable, and the risk was that inflation would rise too much 

and too persistently. After the fact, in all three cases this risk became reality. A policy framework 

should be robust to shocks, and it should correct misdiagnoses. So many successive errors in the 

same  direction  indicate  more  systematic  problems.  The  next  three  factors  point  to  three  such 

problems. 

The Second Factor: Expectations 

No central banker would deny the importance of inflation expectations for the control of 

inflation.  Over  the  last  decade,  expected  inflation  was  very  sticky,  so  that  its  measurements 

reflected mostly noise with little signal. Household surveys of inflation expectations invariably 

returned an answer of 2%, which in every wave was polluted by measurement error. Only through 

careful econometric work were researchers able to uncover interesting patterns that allowed for 

scientific progress in understanding expectations and inflation. In turn, data from financial markets 

likewise reflected mostly changes in risk attitudes as well as financial shocks which introduced 

noise beyond the expected inflation signal. Inflation expectations were solidly anchored because 

10 

 
 
 
of the success of the past. Staffers at the forecasting team of central banks were justified in ignoring 

expectations data in their econometric models (Coibion et al., 2018). 

The  experience  of  2020  confirmed  this  view.  Despite  a  few  months  of  sharp  deflation, 

followed by sharp month-to-month inflation, expectations of inflation stayed remarkably stable. 

The trust that central banks placed in the anchor is evident in the speech by Jerome Powell at the 

August 2021 Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium. The speech discusses data from inflation 

expectations  and  concludes  that:  “Households,  businesses,  and  market  participants  also  believe 

that current high inflation readings are likely to prove transitory and that, in any case, the Fed will 

keep inflation close to our 2 percent objective over time” (Powell 2021). There was nothing to see, 

and the anchor was firmly in the seabed. 

In  fact,  before  inflation  started  rising,  central  bankers  were  mostly  worried  about  the 

possibility  that  expectations  might  be  anchored  at  levels  of  inflation  that  were  too  low.  In  the 

presentation of the Federal Reserve’s new framework in the 2020 Jackson Hole speech, Powell 

discussed  the  problem  of  an  “adverse  cycle  of  ever-lower  inflation  and  inflation  expectations” 

(Powell 2020). The ECB, in its revised monetary policy statement wrote: “In particular, when the 

economy is close to the lower bound, this requires especially forceful or persistent monetary policy 

measures to avoid negative deviations from the inflation target becoming entrenched” (European 

Central Bank 2021).  

Relying  on  anchored  inflation  expectations  and  focusing  on  the  downside  risk  has 

consequences for monetary policy. First, with expected inflation equal to a constant in the Phillips 

curve  framework,  one  of  the  main  drivers  of  inflation  is  absent.  Second,  a  temporary  rise  in 

inflation  expectations  is  welcome.  If  the  fear  is  that  of  a  deflation  trap,  then  a  rise  in  inflation 

expectations is a way to escape the adverse cycle in the Powell quote above. Third, a rise in actual 

11 

 
 
inflation is likely to be transitory. If expectations stay anchored, they pull inflation towards them, 

making most inflation shocks temporary. These three consequences are interlinked: if expectations 

are solidly anchored, then even sharp rises in inflation will only move them up a little, with no risk 

that the anchor would go adrift. 

However, already halfway through the year 2021, the data showed that expectations were 

not so well-anchored. In line with modern research, the key was to look beyond the measure of 

central  tendency  from  household  surveys  and  to  focus  on  measures  of  disagreement.  Figure  3 

shows three snapshots of the distribution of one-year ahead inflation expectations in the University 

of Michigan Surveys of Consumers household expectations. In the first half of 2021, the skewness 

started rising. That is, a rising share of households started expecting that inflation would be higher, 

even as the median changed little. Then, it was the standard deviation that rose decisively as more 

and more households joined the group of pessimists. By 2022, the shift of the distribution to the 

right was such that the median was rising quickly as well. 

This three-stage movement in the distribution of expectations is not unique to 2021–22. 

Looking back to the end of the 1960s in the United States, again the distribution of survey inflation 

expectations shifted slowly to the right, and this was seen first through an increase in skewness, 

then a rise in standard deviation, and finally the rise in the median (Reis, 2022a). This process took 

a few years back then, as opposed to less than one year in 2021–22, but qualitatively it was similar. 

In the other direction, between 1980 and 1985, as inflation sharply came down, again it was first 

skewness, then standard deviation, and finally median that moved as the distribution shifted to its 

new anchor. Another common feature of these three episodes is that the surveys of professionals 

lagged  those  of  households,  and  after  the  fact  turned  out  to  be  the  more  sluggish  and  less 

informative source of data. In normal times, the opposite happens, as household survey data lags 

12 

 
 
professional surveys and is less accurate, but during these three past large changes in inflation, 

household data were more informative. 

Figure 3. The Distribution of U.S Household Survey Inflation Expectations Through 2021–22 

Month

2020 December
2021 June
2022 April

0.125

0.100

0.075

0.050

0.025

0.000

0% 1.5% 3.5% 5% 7.5%

12%

>= 15%

Expected inflation 1 year ahead

Notes: Data from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers household expectations for 1-year ahead expected 
inflation. 

The  data  in  2021  revealed  that  a  large  change  in  expectations  was  under  way.  The 

expectations anchor had left the seabed after a couple of decades during which it had barely moved. 

Perhaps this was the result of the shocks that hit the economy, or perhaps it was a result of the 

loose  monetary  policy  that  accompanied  them.  Bad  luck  played  a  role,  as  some  of  the  relative 

13 

 
 
 
prices  that  moved  the  most  in  2021  (like  gas  prices  or  cars)  were  among  those  most  visible  to 

consumers,  who  will  tend  to  overreact  to  them  when  forming  their  expectations.  Once  central 

banks  allowed  inflation  to  rise,  those  realizations  themselves  fed  into  households  anticipating 

higher  expected  future  inflation.  A  temporary  inflation  shock  becomes  persistent  if  the 

expectations anchor moves with it. 

The Third Factor: Credibility 

Sharp movements in expected inflation over the next year are alarming for the persistence 

of the shock. But if expectations of the distant future continue to be stable, the damage for inflation 

will be limited. The credibility of an inflation-targeting central bank is ultimately measured by 

whether expected long-run inflation is equal to its target. In the long run, money is neutral, the 

Phillips curve is (nearly) vertical, and expected inflation matches actual inflation. If the central 

bank manages to convince economic agents that inflation in the long run will be on target, then 

most of the work of keeping its actual value on target in the long run will have been done.  

In 2021, it was justified to rely on having significant credibility. After all, such credibility 

had been earned after more than 20 years of inflation very close to 2%. Central banks can enjoy a 

“capital of inattention” in that people do not pay much attention to what the central bank is doing, 

trusting it will deliver inflation on target over the next few years. One important consequence of 

this credibility is that it will make the negative relation between inflation and real activity appear 

to be flatter. As people and firms are inattentive, and update their wages and prices less often, the 

extent  of  nominal  rigidities  in  the  economy  rises,  making  monetary  policy  more  powerful  in 

affecting real activity. Relying on this credibility, the central bank can exploit short-run tradeoffs 

between  inflation  and  real  activity  to  try  to  improve  welfare.  Policy  makers  will  appear  more 

14 

 
 
 
 
“dovish”  because  mistakes  in  policies  are  more  likely  to  cause  recessions  than  to  cause  high 

inflation. In 2021, facing an unusual amount of uncertainty about the shocks hitting the economy 

and their ability to measure fast-moving indicators, central banks leaned heavily on their credibility 

by allowing inflation to rise above target to offset the impact of these shocks on real activity. As 

long as they had credibility, inflation would only rise moderately. 

It is hard to survey households on what they expect inflation to be in the distant future. 

Instead, the dominant measure of credibility comes from financial markets. The most used measure 

is the 5-year, 5-year forward inflation expected rate. Using either inflation swaps or nominal and 

inflation-indexed bonds over 5- and 10-year horizons, it computes what the expected inflation will 

be starting in 5 years, on average over the succeeding 5 years. Looking at April 21, 2020, 2021, 

and 2022, this measure increased from 1.34% to 2.13% and then to 2.67%, respectively, in the 

United States. Since market measures include a premium for inflation risk, even the more recent 

number is maybe only slightly above a 2% inflation target. 

However, again the average hides what is behind it in the distribution. Looking beyond the 

mean gives more cause for alarm. Recent research has developed methods to use option prices to 

inspect  these  distributions  and,  especially,  to  accurately  capture  the  probabilities  of  the  tails 

(Hilscher et al, 2022). The top panel of figure 4 shows these distributions for the 10-year horizon 

in the United States throughout 2021. While the average rose little, there was a clear shift to the 

right. Especially during the second half of the year, this shift came with a quick accumulation of 

mass on the right tail. The distributions became increasingly asymmetric as upside risks to inflation 

became dominant. 

15 

 
 
 
Figure 4. Measurements of Credibility of the Federal Reserve from Options Markets 

a. Probability densities for average risk-adjusted inflation over the next ten years 

b. Tail probabilities of a 5-year, 5-year inflation disaster in US and EZ inflation 

United States, >4%
Eurozone, >4%

United States, >5%
Eurozone, >5%

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

.2

.15

.1

.05

0

2020m1

2020m7

2021m1

2021m7

2022m1

Month

Notes: Estimates using the methods in Hilscher et al (2022). The top panel shows 10-year distributions including 
risk premia. The bottom panel shows actual forward probabilities over a 5-year, 5-year horizon.  

16 

 
 
 
 
The bottom panel of figure 4 focuses on that right tail by presenting probabilities that reflect 

how much market participants are willing to pay to insure themselves against an “inflation disaster,” 

a scenario where inflation is persistently higher. To do so, these estimates adjust the tails from the 

top panel to take out the compensation for risk, and they set the horizon to 5-year,  5-year so as to 

focus  on  credibility,  as  opposed  to  pessimism  about  the  immediate  few  years.  The  numbers 

therefore measure the current date market-perceived probability that average inflation will be more 

than 4% starting in 5 years, over the following 5 years. If central bankers are risk managers, they 

should care more about these disasters than about the average outcome that was so often cited in 

2021. 

In the United States, this probability rose steadily from the middle of 2021 onwards. By 

the last date in this sample, April of 2022, it was 16%. Investors were paying a high price to insure 

against the chance that the Federal Reserve would, considerably and persistently, miss its inflation 

target between 2027 and 2032. This reveals a lack of credibility of the Federal Reserve. Credibility 

in the inflation target of the ECB stayed high until the end of 2021. But then, the perceived disaster 

probability jumped up very quickly to 8%. This is less than in the United States, but it still puts a 

considerable dent into the faith that credibility has remained intact. 

Seeing these numbers, relying on credibility of the inflation target to offset policy shocks 

by letting inflation rise is a bold and risky move. 

The Fourth Factor: R-star and the Tolerance of Inflation 

In  2019,  both  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  ECB  announced  they  would  be  revising  the 

framework that guides their monetary policies. When presenting the result of this work at the 2020 

Jackson Hole conference, Jerome Powell cited as one of its important motivations the “…fall in 

17 

 
 
 
the  equilibrium  real  interest  rate,  or  ‘r-star.’”  In  turn,  in  the  overview  document  that  the  ECB 

released presenting its own reviews, the first justification offered for why it was needed was that 

“structural developments have lowered the equilibrium real rate of interest.” 

This r-star refers to the real interest rate at which savings are equal to investment and output 

is at its potential. It is often interpreted and measured as the long-run steady state for real returns 

in  the  economy.  Sometimes  it  is  called  the  neutral  rate  of  interest  because,  in  New  Keynesian 

models, having the nominal interest rate of the central bank above r-star plus the inflation target 

captures contractionary policy. Conversely, if the policy rate is below r-star plus 2%, then policy 

is  understood  to  be  expansionary,  putting  upwards  pressure  on  inflation.  R-star  is  difficult  to 

estimate because it is observed in an equilibrium that is never reached but estimates that it has 

fallen make it more likely that monetary policy is contractionary for any given level of the policy 

rate. 

If r-star is indeed lower, it is more likely that when the central bank needs to lower policy 

rates aggressively to push up inflation, it will find itself unable to do so. It would require policy 

rates  that  are  below  their  “effective  lower  bound”  (ELB).  Therefore,  monetary  policy  will 

sometimes be insufficiently expansionary. In principle, this would lead to too little inflation. The 

central bank can “go long,” trying to affect longer-term interest rates by using forward guidance 

and quantitative easing to provide further expansion, but this may not be enough. 

Matters can get worse. If agents start expecting deflation, and the central bank cannot lower 

interest rates, then this breakdown of the Taylor principle because of the ELB makes deflation 

self-fulfilling. As Powell’s 2020 speech noted, in that case, the economy may enter an “adverse 

cycle of ever-lower inflation and inflation expectations,” leading the economy to become stuck in 

a deflation trap. A long academic literature suggests that, to escape this trap, central banks must 

18 

 
 
find a way to commit to delivering high inflation, above the target, in the future. Future higher 

inflation would boost current inflation, and on average deliver inflation on target. 

An  emphasis  on  a  low  r-star  also  leads  to  a  focus  on  providing  stimulus  to  aggregate 

demand.  In  economies  at  the  ELB,  aggregate  demand  is  too  low.  The  economy  is  persistently 

operating below capacity, so that the looser monetary policy can be, the better. This logic extends 

to fiscal policy, and thus to embracing large deficits and to not worrying about the public debt 

(which, anyway, now pays a lower interest rate). Policies based on supply, in contrast, are less 

important.  At  the  ELB,  the  opportunity  cost  of  liquidity  is  close  to  zero,  so  firms  should  have 

access to abundant liquidity and credit. Improvements in aggregate productivity may even backfire 

and lower output if they lower inflation expectations. 

Putting it all together, if r-star has fallen, then central banks  increasingly start to  worry 

about deflation because of inevitably tight monetary policy even with interest rates near zero. They 

welcome  inflation  rising  above  target,  and  they  focus  on  perpetually  boosting  real  activity  and 

providing  more  and  more  stimulus.  Both  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  ECB’s  mission  reviews 

moved in this direction. But has r-star fallen? 

Figure 5 shows that the ex-post return on long-term government bonds has fallen in the G-

7 countries over the last twenty or thirty years. Short-term government bond yields were close to 

the ELB for many years including 2021. Monetary policy was certainly constrained in providing 

more stimulus. But the theoretical concept of r-star refers to an equilibrium between savings and 

investment in the overall economy. Why would this happen in the government bond market? In 

fact, in the standard neoclassical growth model that defines the output potential in many modern 

macroeconomic models, the interest rate on government bonds is irrelevant, as government bonds 

are not net wealth. It is the marginal product of capital (and time preferences) that determine where 

19 

 
 
savings equal investment. The return on government bonds is only useful because with efficient 

and  complete  capital  markets,  it  provides  a  risk-free  measure  of  the  relevant  r-star,  which 

conceptually is the return to capital in the economy. 

Figure 5. Estimates of R-star from Returns on Government Bonds and on Private Capital 

G7

8

6

4

2

0

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

-2

1980

1990

2000
Year

2010

2020

Return on Private Capital

(Trend)

Return on Public Debt

(Trend)

Notes: Estimates from Reis (2022b). 

Closer to the concept of r-star is to measure the return on investing in the private capital 

stock.  Doing  so  using  financial  returns  is  a  thankless  task  because,  as  the  Modigliani-Miller 

theorem states, the return on capital can be split in many ways between different financial claims, 

and these have likely changed over time. Instead, figure 5 shows a measure of the return to capital 

using  the  income  flows  in  the  aggregate  economy.  Namely,  it  starts  with  value  added  in  the 

economy, subtracts payments to labor and depreciation, and divides it by the private capital stock. 

It is therefore a measure of the average return from owning capital in the economy every year, 

20 

 
 
 
whether those came from profits or costs of finance, or from the payout of loans, bonds, dividends, 

or others. This measure of r-star has been remarkably constant over the last twenty years. There is 

no downward trend in it.  

There has been a trend increase in the difference between the return in the private economy 

and the return on government bonds. Perhaps this is a sign of misallocation of capital away from 

private investment in the capital stock and towards financial investments. It may also reflect an 

inability of capital markets to fund enough investment to bring the marginal product of capital 

down. Or, perhaps it reflects an increasing “specialness” of government bonds in providing safety, 

liquidity, convenience, or some other service that attracts an excess demand for them and justifies 

their paying an inferior return. Whichever it is, the data suggests that r-star may have been constant, 

or it may have fallen, but the difference between private and public returns has definitely risen. 

This  perspective—non-decreasing  return  to  private  capital  and  an  increasing  wedge 

between it and the return on public debt—changes the focus of monetary policy (Reis, 2022b). 

First,  promising  to  increase  inflation  in  the  future  to  raise  inflation  expectations  becomes  less 

appealing. Doing so still lowers the real interest rate on government bonds and boosts consumption 

at the ELB, so it is still an effective policy. However, now it only raises investments if it can reduce 

the real return on the private capital stock, which it may or may not be able to do. Therefore, all 

else being equal, it is likewise less stimulative. The costs of higher inflation may start offsetting 

its benefits. 

Second,  and  related,  the  priority  of  escaping  the  ELB  is  no  longer  as  overwhelming. 

Policies that raise the r-star measured with government bonds may relax the constraint on monetary 

policy. But if these policies do not close the gap to the return on private capital, or even raise the 

21 

 
 
r-star measured with private capital, then they may backfire. They will crowd out investment and 

potentially lower real activity. 

Third,  to  exit  a  situation  of  a  persistent  deflation  trap  and  accompanying  stagnation, 

lowering  the  gap  between  the  return  on  private  capital  and  the  return  on  the  public  debt  is  an 

alternative strategy. This logic points to working on the supply side of the economy, focusing on 

what is disturbing the allocation of savings. It gives a different focus to the one underlying the 

recent mission reviews with their focus on aggregate demand. It instead leads to thinking harder 

about how financial regulation may be helping or hindering an effective allocation of capital, or to 

what extent asset purchases by central banks have aided or distorted the allocation of capital, to 

give two examples. 

Finally, lower interest payments on the public debt allow for a higher level of public debt 

to be sustainable. But, if the source of these lower payments is a rising gap between the return on 

private capital and the return on government debt that is induced by the specialness of public debt, 

then  monetary  policy  should  ask  how  it  contributed  to  that  specialness.  In  particular,  the 

remarkable achievement in stabilizing inflation over the last twenty years may be related to that 

rising gap. It has meant that one of the major risks in lending to the government, which is inflation, 

has  disappeared.  This  suggests  that  if  higher  inflation  comes  with  more  volatile  inflation,  and 

hence higher inflation risk premia, then this may well close the gap between the two rates of return 

by raising the return that bondholders require on public debt. This would hurt debt sustainability. 

Delivering on the mandate of price stability becomes even more important (Reis, 2022c). 

22 

 
 
 
Conclusion 

The rise in inflation in 2021–22 is such a dramatic event that it will likely spur a large 

literature and a heated debate in trying to explain it over the next many years. Perhaps it may even 

trigger regime changes in how monetary policy is conducted. In the short run, it is surely leading 

to changes in policy to bring inflation back on target. 

This  article  made  some  contributions  to  this  analysis.  It  started  by  reminding  that  the 

institutional regime that is in place today, based on independent central banks with inflation targets 

that set interest rates predictably, has served the advanced economies very well over the previous 

thirty years. It seems unwise to throw it out after one year of high inflation. 

Second, it put forward four structural causes for why inflation rose so much. Common to 

all of them is a presumption that if inflation rises, it is because the central bank allowed it to rise. 

Every year has its shocks hitting the economy and its challenges for central banks. The past always 

seems  rosier  in  comparison  with  the  turmoil  of  the  present.  But  theoretically,  the  institutional 

regime described above is predicated on the principle that ultimately the central bank can always 

use  its  tools  to  rein  in  inflation  around  its  target  on  average  over  a  few  years.  When  it  allows 

inflation to deviate significantly from target in the short run, it is by choice, in trading-off other 

objectives. Empirically, over the last two decades, dozens of countries all over the world adopted 

this institutional regime under all kinds of circumstances and facing all types of shocks. Almost 

all and almost always they were able to deliver low and stable average inflation. 

The first of the causes for the failure this time was that the unusual and large shocks of 

2020–22 were almost always diagnosed in a way that justified keeping monetary policy extremely 

loose. The fast recovery of 2021 was not enough to trigger a quick reversal on previous forward 

guidance since the focus was on real activity. The succession of supply shocks was all interpreted 

23 

 
 
as  temporary  markup  shocks  as  opposed  to  persistent  changes  in  potential  output.  As  a  result, 

purposely allowing inflation to overshoot its target was seen as optimal and desirable. That is, until 

it became too large to justify. 

The second cause was a steadfast belief that inflation expectations would stay anchored, as 

they had been for two decades. This belief led to relying on surveys of professionals and on the 

median  expectation  of  inflation  from  household  surveys  to  support  this  strong  prior.  The 

distribution  of  survey  inflation  expectations  and  the  historical  experience  with  regime  shifts 

pointed elsewhere already in the second half of 2021, and this became clear in 2022. Missing the 

drift  of  its  anchor,  central  banks  underestimated  the  persistence  that  the  deviations  of  inflation 

from target would have. 

The third cause was an over-reliance on the credibility of monetary policy. The capital of 

inattention  that  the  central  bank  had  earned  in  the  past  would  have  allowed  it  to  focus  on  real 

activity or other parts of its mandate during an uncertain time. Yet, either by bad luck or by leaning 

too hard on this past credibility, some of it was lost, producing an upward spiral of inflation when 

output rose above potential. 

The fourth cause was the influence of estimates of a falling and low r-star in the revision 

of the frameworks for monetary policy. These led to a determination to fight low inflation, and an 

increased  tolerance  for  inflation  above  target,  as  well  as  a  focus  on  stimulating  the  economy 

through  aggregate  demand.  When  inflation  started  rising,  this  contributed  to  not  fighting  it  as 

vigorously as otherwise might have been the case. The r-star that comes from private returns has 

been constant, and the rising gap between those returns and those on public debt suggest that a 

different set of policies might have been warranted. 

24 

 
 
This  paper  proposed  these  causes  as  hypotheses.  While  there  is  a  strong  case  that  they 

played a role, future research will tell if they were quantitatively the most relevant. For now, facing 

the challenge of bringing down inflation, they suggest that policies in the near term may involve: 

(i) accepting lower levels of real activity in the future, (ii) acting vigorously and sharply in the near 

future  with  raising  interest  rates  to  re-anchor  expectations,  (iii)  re-stating  as  loudly  and 

convincingly  as  possible  the  primacy  of  price  stability  as  the  goal  that  guides  policy,  and  (iv) 

revising upwards the relative costs of high inflation while re-focusing on aggregate supply policies. 

References 

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Rupal Kamdar. 2017. “The Formation of Expectations, Inflation, and the 

Phillips Curve.” Journal of Economic Literature 56: 1447–91. 

Evans,  Charles.  2011.  “The  Fed’s  Dual  Mandate  Responsibilities  and  Challenges  Facing  US  Monetary  Policy.” 
Speech  at  the  European  Economics  and  Financial  Centre,  London,  September  7.  Available  at: 
https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/speeches/2011/09-07-dual-mandate. 

European  Central  Bank.  2021.  “An  Overview  of  the  ECB’s  Monetary  Policy  Strategy,”  July  8.  Available  at 

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/home/search/review/html/ecb.strategyreview_monpol_strategy_overview.en.ht
ml. 

Hilscher, Jens, Alon Raviv, and Ricardo Reis. 2022. “How Likely is An Inflation Disaster?” CEPR discussion paper 

17224. 

Miles,  David,  Ugo  Panizza,  Ricardo  Reis,  and  Angel  Ubide.  2017.  And  Yet  It  Moves.  Inflation  and  the  Great 

Recession. Geneva Reports on the World Economy 19, CEPR Press, 2017. 

Powell,  Jerome.  2020.  “New  Economic  Challenges  and  the  Fed’s  Monetary  Policy  Review.”  Speech  at  the  2020 
at: 

Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming,  August 

economic 
in 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20200827a.htm. 

27.  Available 

symposium 

policy 

———. 2021. “Monetary Policy in the Time of COVID.” Speech at the 2021 economic policy symposium in Jackson 
at: 

Hole, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20210827a.htm. 

Wyoming, 

Available 

August 

27. 

Reis, Ricardo. 2022a. “Losing the Inflation Anchor.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming. 

———.  2022b.  “Has  Monetary  Policy  Cared  Too  Much  about  a  Poor  Measure  of  r*?”  Unpublished  manuscript, 

presented at the Asian Monetary Policy Forum, May. 

———. 2022c. “Steady Prices, Sustainable Debt.” Finance and Development 59, no. 1 (March): 16–19. 

25 

 
 
 
 
DANMARKS
NATIONALBANK

The burst of high inflation in 2021-22: 
How and why did we get here? by Ricardo Reis

Discussion by Signe Krogstrup, member of the board of governors, Danmarks Nationalbank
At the BIS Annual Conference
24 June 2022

On (mis)diagnosis and hindsight

Strong demand for goods in the US, but less so in the EU…

… while the persistence of global value chain pressures was 
unexpected

Note: The chart shows private service- and goods consumption in real terms.
Source: Macrobond and own calculations.

Note: The index is based on a number of indicators including freight costs, delivery times, production backlogs 
and inventory accumulation, see Benigno m.fl.
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

2

-2-1012345Standard deviations from meanNew York Fed Global Supply Chain Pressure IndexIncreased pressure on global supply chainsEarthquake in JapanCovid98000204060810121416182022758085909510010511011512019Q420Q120Q220Q320Q421Q121Q221Q321Q422Q1Index, 2019Q4=100USA, goodsUSA, servicesEuro area, goodsEuro area,servicesInflation expectations deanchoring? 
Relevant horizon

Inflation expectations at the one-year horizon have indeed 
picked up …

… but the increase is less dramatic for 3-year inflation 
expectations

Note: : The chart shows 1-year inflation expectations based on inflation swaps cleaned for risk premiums.
Source: Refinitiv Eikon and own calculations.

Note: The chart shows 3-year inflation expectations based on inflation swaps cleaned for risk premiums.
Source: Refinitiv Eikon and own calculations.

3

01234Per centEuro areaUSAInflationtarget121314151617181920212201234Per cent1213141516171819202122USAEuro areaInflationtargetInflation expectations deanchoring?
What is in the tail?

Danish households disagree about future inflation…

… but if we put less weight on households with poor track 
record in assessing current inflation, the picture changes

Note: Standard deviations reflect how much households disagree about future inflation. Skewness is a measure for the location of most of the households’ expectations relative to the mean. 
The chart to the right puts more weight on households who were historically better at assessing current inflation.
Source: Statistics Denmark and own calculations.

4

-2024681012Standard deviationSkewness07080910111213141516171819202122Covid-19-2024681012Standard deviationSkewness07080910111213141516171819202122Covid-19Inflation expectations are (re-)anchored. But the salience 
of inflation may change expectations

Expectations of financial market participants based on inflation 
swaps have priced a deflationary risk until recently…

… including for longer horizons.

Source: Refinitiv Eikon and own calculations.

Source: Refinitiv Eikon and own calculations.

5

0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Per centInfation riskpremium5Y5Y inflationswap rateExpected inflation04050607080910111213141516171819202122ECBinflation targe0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Per cent040506070809101112131415161718192021225Y inflations swap rateECB inflation target Expected inflationInflation risk premiumR* level and relevant measure

Note: Series are computed based on 3-year moving averages of yields. The Aaa and Baa corporate bond yields are based on the Moody’s seasoned Aaa and Baa corporate bond yields. The 10-year treasury yield is the market yield 
on U.S. treasury securities at 10-Year constant maturity reported by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Source: FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

6

048121619561961196619711976198119861991199620012006201120162021Per centBaa Corporate Bond Yield10-Year U.S. Treasury SecuritiesAaa Corporate Bond YieldSPEECH 
DISCUSSION OF RICARDO REIS, BY GOVERNOR 
SIGNE KROGSTRUP, DANMARKS NATIONALBANK 
AT THE BIS ANNUAL CONFERENCE, 24 JUNE 
2022, BASEL. 

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

It is a pleasure to comment on Professor Reis’ paper and talk, which ad-

dress an important question: How and why did inflation rates get so 

high? Reis’ underlying presumption is that central banks control inflation, 

and hence, concludes that high inflation levels reflect that monetary pol-

icy was not tightened in time. Reis proposes four hypotheses for this de-

lay in policy tightening:  

1.  A misdiagnosis of shocks in 2021 
2.  Lack of attention to inflation expectations deanchoring in 2021 
3.  Reliance on past credibility to allow room for inaction or delay of 

tighening 

4.  The narrative of a low R* and concerns of deanchoring on the down-

side 

I enjoyed reading the paper and found the questions relevant and the an-

swers thought provoking. I agree with many points and observations. I 

am, however, skeptical about some conclusions, and with the hope of 

stimulating debate, I will challenge some of these in my discussion. I will 

focus on the euro area and Denmark in my remarks and push back 

against calling the shocks misdiagnosed in 2021, given the information 

Page 1 of 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
set we had at the time, and the uncertainty of the shocks that subse-

quently hit us. I will also challenge whether there were clear signs of 

deanchoring expectations in 2021, or even now, although I agree that ex-

pectations are a key concern. I will finish with a brief comment on R*. 

Slide 2 

Reis describes how the rise in inflation in 2021 was caused by a mix of de-

mand and supply factors in connection with the pandemic:  

•  Strong policy stimulus and surprisingly fast recoveries after lock-

downs. 

•  A global shift in demand toward goods and away from services, as il-

lustrated in slide 2 for the US. 

•  On the supply side, persistent supply chain pressures (see slide 2) and 

other supply constraints, as well as rising energy prices. 

These factors triggered a sharp rise in goods price inflation starting in 

2021, not matched by a corresponding drop in service price inflation. 

Were these pressures mis-diagnosed as temporary, to be “seen through”, 

while in fact it should have been clear already in mid-2021 that they re-

quired policy tightening? Should we have seen it coming? I have two 

comments on this question. 

First, the story is not the same for the US and the Euro area. Demand was 

not strong in the euro area, and the data did not suggest that the euro 

area was overheating in 2021 (see slide 2). Global inflation factors partic-

ularly in the case of goods markets, rather than domestic demand, seem 

to have played an unusually important early role in driving inflation in the 

euro area. 

Second, from a euro area and Danish perspective, based on the available 

information we had in 2021, I see the diagnosis of temporary drivers of 

inflation in 2021 as appropriate, even with hindsight. The predominant 

baseline scenario was that the vaccine rollout would gradually rein in the 

virus, and result in gradual normalization of services vs goods demand, 

and improvements in global supply chains. It may seem naïve now, but 

we had no experience of coming out of a pandemic to rely on. Energy 

prices were assumed not to continue to rise and demand was, as men-

tioned, muted. If this baseline scenario had occurred, it could have been 

Side 2 af 5 

 
 
temporarily deflationary, not inflationary. Instead, as we know now, the 

opposite occurred. We were hit with new unexpected shocks that further 

stoked global inflation. The point is that from our perspective in 2021, the 

subsequent accelerating inflation path was not inevitable, and not even 

the most likely scenario. 

Slide 3 

My second comment addresses Reis’ point that signs of deanchoring in-

flation expectations were ignored in 2021. My reading of the data is that 

it was broadly suggestive of anchored expectations in 2021, and still is, 

but there is cause for concern. Let me explain. 

Much of Reis’ analysis relies on 1-year expectations. Slide 3 left offers an 

example, indeed indicating a rise above targets in 2021. However, 1-year 

expectations do not capture deanchoring, for two reasons. First, expecta-

tions on this short horizon closely follow actual core inflation develop-

ments, as inflation is persistent. It would have been odd with one-year in-

flation expectations at target when actual inflation was rising well above 

target. Second, it is too short a horizon for monetary policy to influence 

inflation. Monetary policy has notoriously long and variable lags. A three-

year horizon, closer to the horizon that monetary policy can influence, 

shows a more muted rise in inflation expectations and only in 2022, as 

shown on the slide to the right.  

Reis focuses on movements in the distributions of household inflation ex-

pectations as a sign of deanchoring inflation expectations. 

Slide 4 

He shows that while mean inflation expectations were relatively stable, 

skewness, and then the standard deviation, started rising in 2021, and ar-

gues that such patterns have historically been associated with episodes 

of deanchoring. Slide 4, left, illustrates this based on Danish household 

survey data. The rise in skewness is not strong, but the standard 

Side 3 af 5 

 
 
deviation increases as the pandemic set in, and again in the spring of 

2022. Not shown, but the right tail of expectations of inflation above 10% 

has risen since mid-2021. While clearly a warning sign, I interpret these 

movements as signs of an inflection point with high uncertaintly as to 

where the economy is heading, rather than an indicator of the direction 

that expectations are heading. Earlier episodes with high uncertainty 

have seen similar 