BIS Working Papers 
No 1150

Markups and the 
asymmetric pass-
through of cost push 
shocks 

by  Enisse  Kharroubi,  Renée  Spigt,  Deniz  Igan,  Koji 
Takahashi, Egon Zakrajšek 

Monetary and Economic Department 

November 2023 

JEL classification: E31, D22, L13 

Keywords:  market  power,  inflation,  oil  shocks,  pass-

through, profits 

BIS  Working  Papers  are  written  by  members  of  the  Monetary  and  Economic 
Department of the Bank for International Settlements, and from time to time by other 
economists,  and  are  published  by  the  Bank.  The  papers  are  on  subjects  of  topical 
interest and are technical in character. The views expressed in them are those of their 
authors and not necessarily the views of the BIS. 

This publication is available on the BIS website (www.bis.org). 

©  Bank for International Settlements 2023. All rights reserved. Brief excerpts may be 

reproduced or translated provided the source is stated. 

ISSN 1020-0959 (print) 
ISSN 1682-7678 (online) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Markups and the Asymmetric Pass-Through of

Cost Push Shocks*

Enisse Kharroubi

Ren´ee Spigt

Deniz Igan

Koji Takahashi

Egon Zakrajˇsek

Bank for International Settlements

Abstract

This paper studies how prices and markups respond to cost push shocks, taking

the example of global oil supply shocks. Using sector-level data for the US, we first

document a weaker pass-through of global oil shocks to PPI inflation in sectors where

firms charge higher markups. However, high markups mainly reduce the pass-through
of dis-inflationary oil shocks, while they barely affect that of inflationary oil shocks.

Second, using firm-level data, we show that following a dis-inflationary oil shock,

high-markup firms are more likely to raise their markup. In addition, they are also

more likely to increase their revenues, and hence their profits. Conversely, we find no
difference in the response of high- and low-markup firms to inflationary oil shocks.

Taken together, these results suggest that high-markup firms draw significant benefits

from dis-inflationary oil shocks, as they are able to raise their markups and expand

their revenues. They also suggest that high markups provide little cushion against

prices pressures stemming from inflationary oil shocks.

Keywords: Markup, PPI inflation, oil shock, pass-through, profits.

JEL Classification codes: E31, D22, L13

*The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official views
of the Bank for International Settlements. Deniz Igan, Enisse Kharroubi, Koji Takahashi and Egon Zakrajˇsek
are at the BIS. Ren´ee Spigt is a Ph.D. fellow visiting the BIS from the Erasmus University in Rotterdam.
Corresponding author: Enisse Kharroubi (enisse.kharroubi@bis.org)

1

“Increasingly dominant corporations are taking the opportunity to jack up

prices [...] squeezing consumers and supercharging inflation. Or “greedfla-

tion,” as the hypothesis has come to be known.”

— New York Times, June 3, 2022.

1

Introduction

Many countries around the world have witnessed a large rise in firm market power over

the last decades, as reflected in the secular increase in markups (De Loecker et al. (2020)).

Between the early 80’s and the mid-2010’s, markups increased by about 50% at the global

level, and by about 75% in Advanced Economies (AEs).1 Against this background, and

following the global resurgence of inflation, markups have become one of the focal points

of policy discussions questioning their role in the current inflation surge, or examining

policies to address inflationary pressures. On the one hand, there was hope that high

markups could act as a shock absorber and help cushion inflationary pressures. Indeed,
contrary to firms pricing at their marginal cost, firms charging large markups can afford,

when faced with a cost increase, to pass-on only some of it to their costumers, absorbing

the other part through markup cuts.2 On the other hand, the worry was and still is, that

high markups could just act as oil on fire and contribute to the inflationary dynamics as

firms holding large market power could more easily impose their price conditions and

therefore pass-on cost increases to their customers.

Likewise, another, albeit more recent, worry has been that firms, especially those

charging high markups, could retain some of the benefits of falling input cost. These

concerns find their sources in the asymmetric relationship between input and output

1Figures on markup changes are from De Loecker and Eeckhout (2018). See also Kouvavas et al. (2021)
for markup estimates for the Euro area, Aquilante et al. (2019) for the United Kingdom, Ciapanna et al.
(2022) for Italy, Nakamura and Ohashi (2020) for Japan and Hambur (2021) for Australia. D´ıez et al. (2018)
provides an international comparison, showing that in advanced economies, there has been a significant
increase in markups, which is broad-based across industries and countries, and driven by the firms with the
highest markups in each economic sector. For emerging markets and developing economies, the authors
find less support for an upward trend in markups.

2The negative relationship between cost pass-through and market power typically holds when firms
produce a homogeneous good, compete `a la Cournot and the elasticity of the inverse demand function is
not too low (above -1). Amiti et al. (2019) provide firm-level evidence consistent with this mechanism.

2

prices. In the US for instance, when input price are increasing, i.e. when the diffusion

index is above the historical median, the relationship between to output prices is relatively

tight, and higher input prices are associated with higher output prices (left-hand panel,
Figure 1). By contrast, when input price are falling, i.e. the diffusion index is below the

median, the relationship between input and output prices is much looser and a drop in

input prices is not associated with any clear trend in output prices, especially in the short

run (right-hand panel, Figure 1).3

Figure 1: Output price sensitivity to input price. The blue line in each panel represents the percentage
change in the PMI diffusion index for output prices following a one percentage point increase in the PMI
diffusion index for input prices, for a horizon running from zero to 12 months, controlling for the current
level of the PMI diffusion index for output prices. The left-hand panel (right-hand panel) estimates this
relationship when the input price variable is above (below) the median. Dashed red lines display the 90%
confidence interval around the mean estimate (in blue). Sample period = 2010m1-2023m4.

In this paper, we try to make sense of these differences and understand how markups
affect the pass-through of cost shocks, taking the example of global oil supply shocks.

Specifically, we use data for US sectors and firms over a 20-year period and explore two

questions. First, considering sectoral producer price index (PPI) inflation, we test whether

the data supports the view that high markups can act as shock absorbers, i.e.

that oil

price shocks have a smaller price impact in sectors where firms charge higher markups. In

3Figure A.1 in Appendix A provides similar evidence for the Euro Area.

3

addition, given that the role of markups as shock absorbers is particularly relevant in the

case of inflationary ”cost push” shocks, we go one step further and investigate if markups
affect the pass-through of positive and negative oil shocks to PPI inflation differently. In a

nutshell, we do find evidence that markups can act as shock absorbers: the pass-through of
oil price shocks to sectoral PPI inflation effectively tends to be lower in sectors where firms

charge higher markups. However, we also find that markups reduce the pass-through of

dis-inflationary oil price shocks (i.e. positive oil supply shocks), but not that of inflationary
ones (i.e. negative oil supply shocks). Put differently, high markups act as shock absorbers

on the way down, not on the way up.

Second we go to firm-level data, to understand the mechanisms behind the asymmetric

impact of markups on the pass-through of oil shocks. For this, we explore how firms react

to oil shocks, considering both prices and quantities. Specifically, we first investigate the

dynamics of markups at the firm-level, i.e. how firms change their markups following a

given oil shock. There, consistent with sector-level evidence, we find that high-markup

firms are more likely to raise their markup following a dis-inflationary oil shock than

low-markup firms, suggesting that firms holding market power take opportunity of cost-

reducing shocks to increase profits, instead of lowering prices. Quantification however
shows that the increase in markups —the intensive margin effect— , while statistically

significant, is not economically large. We therefore go one step further and look into firm
growth —the extensive margin effect— and estimate how revenues (and profits) at the

firm-level change following an oil price shock. Here, we find that firms charging higher

markups tend to increase their revenues and earn larger profits following a dis-inflationary

oil shock relative to firms with lower markups, consistent with sector-level evidence.

The firm-level analysis therefore suggests that the asymmetric impact of markups on

the pass-through of oil price shocks reflects a combination of intensive and extensive
margin effects, even if quantitatively the latter seems more important. Following a dis-

inflationary oil shock, high-markup firms are more likely to raise their markup (intensive
margin effect) and to grow disproportionately faster (extensive margin effect). As high-

markup firms raise their markup and become larger, the sector-wide markup increases,

which dampens the impact of dis-inflationary oil shocks.

4

1.1 Literature review

This paper relates to three different strands of literature. First, this paper builds on the

production function approach to estimate firm-level markups as proposed by De Loecker

and Warzynski (2012). Following seminal contributions by Hall (1988) and Roeger (1995),

which provide country-level estimates for markups by estimating an extended expression

for the Solow residual, a growing number of papers investigating markups has shifted

to the production function approach, in part because of the flexibility in the estimation

assumptions)4, and despite some limitations, including substantial variation in markup

estimates or some implausible implications (Syverson (2019) and Basu (2019)). Based on

this approach, a number of studies have investigated the macroeconomic implications of

increasing market power and markups (De Loecker et al., 2020).

Second, this paper contributes to the literature on the real effects of firm market power.

Feenstra et al. (1996), Nakamura and Zerom (2010), Koujianou Goldberg and Hellerstein

(2013) and Amiti et al. (2019) all provide empirical estimates of pass-through and markup

variability. Focusing on the estimation of strategic complementarities at the firm-level,

Amiti et al. (2019) show that prices of large firms display lower elasticity to own cost

shocks. Conversely, small firms show higher elasticity, with complete pass-through. We
differ from these papers in that we investigate the extent to which differences in markups
—across firms or sectors— can account for differences in pass-through. Duval et al.

(2021) show using firm-level data that higher markups dampen the response of output

to monetary policy shocks. Kouvavas et al. (2021) run a similar exercise for Euro Area

countries, providing suggestive evidence that inflation is less volatile in sectors where

firms charge higher markups. In these countries, not only the pass-through of monetary

policy shocks to inflation appears to be weaker for high-markup sectors but also the pass-

through of oil supply and global demand shocks. That said, they do not look, as we do,
into possible asymmetric effect of markups.5 Nor do they complement their sector-level

analysis with an investigation of the evolution of markups at the firm-level as we do

4Bond et al. (2021) and Raval (2023) propose some modification of the production function approach.
5Importantly, this paper concludes that high markups have contributed to low inflation by shielded Euro
Area countries from the fall out of inflationary shocks. Conversely, the evidence presented in this paper for
the United States rather shows that high markups barely provide any hedge against such shocks.

5

in this paper. Br¨auning et al. (2022) are close to this paper in that they investigate the
differential effect of concentration on the pass-through of both positive as well as negative

cost shocks. They find however no impact of concentration on the pass-through of negative

cost shocks. Conversely, they show that the pass-through of positive cost shocks is larger
in more concentrated industries. While these results differ from ours, it is important to
note that concentration, while useful to proxy for market power, also suffer a number of

drawbacks, that can make it a poor approximation for market power (Berry et al., 2019).

Finally, Conlon et al. (2023) measure the correlation between the change in firm-level

markups and the change in industry-level prices as measured by the PPI and find little

to no relationship. One explanation is that markups could have risen more quickly than

prices in the aggregate, which could indicate that firms have not fully passed on declines

in marginal costs to consumers.

In this respect, our paper provide empirical evidence

consistent with this view: following positive oil supply shocks, high-markup firms do

not seem to pass on fully the reduction in the marginal cost of production. Instead, they

benefit from their pricing power after dis-inflationary oil supply shocks by increasing

their markups, sales and profits. Also, we do not find any evidence that firms with higher

markups cushion inflationary price pressures. The fact that firms with pricing power can

benefit from supply side developments, relates somewhat to the findings of Franzoni et al.

(2023). However, the origins of their shocks are not directly related to input costs but

to supply chain shortages. They find that ”superstar” firms benefit from supply chain

shortages through higher markups and profitability.

Third, our paper adds to the specific literature on the pass-through of energy cost

shocks. Using data on French manufacturing firms’ prices, Lafrogne-Joussier et al. (2023)

show that firms pass on 100% of energy cost shocks (and 30% of non-energy imported

input price shocks), conditional on their exposure to these shocks. They also find evidence

of asymmetric pass-through, with positive cost shocks inducing significantly higher pass-
In our paper, we find a similar asymmetric effect.

through than to negative shocks.

However, we go one step further in that we find that the asymmetry is driven by sector-

and firm-level markups. In addition, we exploit the full universe of sectors, and a longer

time span from 1997 to 2019, allowing us to examine not only many positive cost shocks

6

but also a substantial number of negative cost shocks.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our estimation method-

ology of markups and the estimates as well as the firm-level datasets. Section 3 describes

the oil supply shock and sectoral PPI inflation data. Section 4 estimates the pass-through

of oil shocks to inflation at the sectoral level. Section 5 explores the mechanism behind the
difference in the sectoral pass-through using firm-level markups and revenues. Finally,

concluding remarks are given in Section 6.

2 Markup estimation

In this section, we review the methodology used to estimate markups as well as the data

used in this estimation. We then briefly discuss our markup estimates and benchmark

them against those existing in the literature.

2.1 Methodology

To estimate markups, we follow the production function approach pioneered by De Loecker
and Warzynski (2012). Let us denote µit the markup for firm i at time t as the ratio of its
price Pit to its marginal cost of production MCit, i.e. µit = Pit
MCit

. Then, let us assume firm i’s

technology is summarised by a production function F which depends on a set of variable

, ..., Vv

inputs V1
it
capital stock— and total factor productivity ωit:

it, —-eg. labour, material, energy, etc.—, a state variable Kit —typically the

Yit = F(V1
it

, ..., Vv
it

, Kit, ωit)

(1)

Then, solving the cost minimization problem, the expression for the markup of firm i at

time t simplifies as:

µit = βv
it

(cid:35)

(cid:34)

PitYit
Pv
itVit

7

(2)

where βv

it is the elasticity of firm i’s output at time t to the variable input v and PitYit
Pv
itVit

is the

ratio of output to the variable input v for firm i at time t.

Obtaining (one of) the elasticities β of output to the variable inputs requires estimating

the production function, which in turn requires making three choices: one about the spe-

cific functional form for F, one about the panel of firms you use to estimate the production

function on, and finally one about productivity shocks and in particular how to address

related simultaneity issues. First, we assume a Cobb-Douglas production function, so that

the production function can be estimated using linear regressions on the log-transformed

variables. In addition, we assume that firms’ output (revenues) depends on capital (net

property plant and equipment) and a composite variable input (cost of goods sold) that

bundles labour and intermediary inputs together.

Second, in line with De Loecker et al. (2020), we estimate the production functions

for a panel of firms within the same industry, which in our case is defined by the 3-digit

NAICS industry.

In the time dimension, we consider a three-year (backward-looking)

rolling window, to account for technology and productivity changes over time.

Third, productivity shocks can induce a simultaneity bias in the production function

estimation as firms facing positive productivity shocks are likely to increase their demand
for inputs and expand output at the same time, thereby affecting the estimates for the
βs,t elasticity. Here, we follow Olley and Pakes (1996), and use log-capital expenditures

to proxy for firm-level productivity shocks, the idea being that capital expenditures and

productivity shocks should be positively correlated.6 Hence, letting lower-case letters

represent logs of upper-case variables, the Cobb-Douglas production function writes as:

yi,t = α + vi,tβs,t + ki,tγs,t + ωi,t + εi,t

(3)

where i refers to firm, s refers to sector and t refers to the time dimension. y is the

log of output, v is the log of the cost of goods sold, k is the log of net property, plant
and equipment, the state variable, ω is the unobservable productivity efficiency and ε

is a white noise idiosyncratic shock. Then assuming firm-level investment increases

6This approach is valid when the idiosyncratic productivity shock is not correlated with the current and

lagged values of the state variable, here capital.

8

monotonically and is invertible in firm-level productivity, i.e. iit = f
, we can write
firm-level productivity ω as a function of capital and investment.7 Formally, inverting their
investment policy function, and denoting h (.) the invert of f (.), the production function

ki,t; ωi,t

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(3) can be written as

yi,t = α + vi,tβs,t + ki,tγs,t + h

(cid:0)

iit; ki,t

(cid:1) + εi,t = α + vi,tβs,t + Φs,t

(cid:0)

iit; ki,t

(cid:1) + εi,t

(4)

The estimation procedure then goes into two steps. The first stage is about approximating
the Φs,t function. For this, we use a third degree polynomial. Second, denoting (cid:99)Φs,t the
estimate for Φs,t , one can get a consistent estimate of βs,t by estimating the regression:

yi,t = α + vi,tβs,t + (cid:99)Φs,t

(cid:0)

iit; ki,t

(cid:1) + εi,t

(5)

Denoting (cid:99)βs,t the estimate for βs,t, the estimated markup for firm i at time t then writes as

µi,t = (cid:99)βs,t

(cid:35)−1

(cid:34)Pv
i,tVi,t
Pi,tYi,t

(6)

where Pi,tYi,t and PV

i,tVi,t are respectively the values for firm i output and variable input at

time t.

2.2 Data

This paper focuses on firms from the United States. To estimate their markups, we use

firm-level data from Standards and Poor’s Capital IQ. This source provides standard

balance sheet and income statement data for listed and large private firms. This includes

data on total revenues, cost of goods sold (COGS), net property plant and equipment,

and capital expenditures, which we use to measure respectively gross output, the variable

input, capital and investment.8 The data sample runs from 1998 to 2019 and covers all

7There are two additional requirements. One is that the state variable evolves according to the investment
policy function. Another is that the variable input v is non-dynamic, i.e. it does not affect subsequent profits.
8We deflate all variables used to estimate the markups with the corresponding price index. Revenues
and cost of goods sold are deflated with the gross output price index, capital expenditures with the gross
fixed capital formation price index and net property plant and equipment with the capital goods price

9

sectors in the US economy, with more than 15,000 individual firms over the full sample

period. We perform several cleaning steps before running the estimation of markups.9

This shrinks our sample to about 7,000 public and private firms.10

We construct markups by estimating sector-specific elasticities of output to COGS,

lumping together all firms that operate in a given sector, following the 3-digit NAICS

industrial classification, spanning about 75 sectors covering all sectors in the economy,

but ”Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting”, ”Finance and Insurance”, ”Government

and Non-Profit Firms”, ”Oil and Gas Extraction”, and ”Utilities”. We exclude these

industries from the sector-level analysis either because there is no corresponding PPI

data (Agriculture or Government Firms), because estimated markups are likely unreliable

measures of market power (Finance and Insurance or Utilities), or because oil supply

shocks are unlikely to be a good proxy for cost push shocks (Oil and Gas Extraction).11

Moreover we estimate time-varying elasticities by estimating production functions over

three-year backward-looking rolling windows. This way, we can allow for changes —

cyclical or structural— in the production function parameters. Finally, markups being

estimated at the firm-level, we construct sector-level markup aggregates using quantiles

of the within sector-time distribution of firm markups, where firm-level observations

are weighted by revenues. Specifically, denoting Fs,t the cumulative distribution of firm

markups in sector s at time t, and considering the nth-percentile of the firm revenue

distribution in sector s at time t, the markup for sector s at time t for the nth-percentile,
which we denote mkupn

s,t, is defined as Fs,t

(cid:16)
mkupn
s,t

= n

(cid:17)

100 .

index. Moreover, we winsorise the growth rates of revenues, capital expenditures, net property plant and
equipment and cost of goods at the 1st and 99th percentile to exclude outliers. In the firm-level analysis, we
limit the range of markup to 0.5-2.5 and exclude any observation with a markup estimate outside this range.
9In particular, we drop firms with missing or below zero values for total revenues, net property plant and
equipment, cost of goods sold and capital expenditures, total debt or total assets. In addition, we exclude
firms with less than five years of data and sector-year pairs with less than five firms.

10In Figure A.2 we show that the growth rate in aggregated revenues of our sample of firms follows simlar

trends over time as the total gross output as published by the US BEA.

11Another issue is that some firms report more than one sector of activity. In the absence of a sectoral
break-down of revenues and costs, we duplicate the data so that these firms are represented in each sector
they operate in. Note that for the firm-level regressions, we make sure that there only exists one observation
for a given firm-year.

10

2.3 Markup estimates

The left-hand panel of Figure 2 plots the distribution of estimated markups, when sectoral

markups are aggregated at the one-digit level. First, our estimates of median markups

tend to overlap quite well with those provided by De Loecker et al. (2020), which are

estimated based on Compustat data. As is the case with our estimates, De Loecker et al.

(2020) finds ”Wholesale Trade” and ”Transportation & Warehousing” to be amongst the

sectors with the lowest sectoral markups, and ”Information”, ”Manufacturing” and ”Other

Services” to be amongst sectors with the highest markups. Also, the markups of sectors as

”Construction”, ”Retail Trade” and ”Accommodation & Food Services” are close to each

other in magnitude with a median markup of around 1.1. For some sectors, the ranking
slightly differs. According to our estimates ”Mining” is for example at the lower end of

the sectoral markup spectrum, whereas De Loecker et al. (2020) estimate the ”Mining”
sectoral markup to be in the middle. Such differences could arise, because of differences in

sub-sector composition of the 2-digit NAICS code. As discussed in Section 2.2, we exclude

the 3-digit NAICS sectors that are related to oil and gas extraction, which are part of the

2-digit NAICS ”Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction” sector. Furthermore, in

contrast to De Loecker et al. (2020), we not only cover public firms but also large private

firms and we extend our sample period to 2019 instead of 2016.

11

Figure 2: The distribution of sectoral markup. The left-hand figure shows the distribution of markups
for 2-digit NAICS sectors, and with revenue-weighted percentiles. The box shows the interquartile range
together with the median sectoral markup. The whiskers use the 10th and 90th percentile as the lower
and upper extremes. The right-hand panel shows the 3-digit NAICS revenue-weighted sectoral median
markups plotted against the revenue-weighted octile skewness, with the octile skewness computed by
(Q0.875−Q0.5)−(Q0.5−Q0.125)
. All dots represent 3-digit NAICS sectors, with in red the industry-related sectors and in
Q0.875−Q0.125
blue the services-related sectors. Both panels are estimated using firm-level data, and cover our full sample
period.

Second, turning to the within-sector distribution of markups, dispersion within 2-digit

sectors also turns out to be quite significant. It is largest in ”Manufacturing”, ”Arts, Enter-

tainment & Recreation” and ”Other Services”, with a revenue-weighted standard deviation

of 0.32 against a weighted average of 1.2, 0.9 and 1.3, respectively. Conversely, sectors

like ”Mining” or ”Wholesale Trade” and ”Retail Trade”, display much lower markup
dispersion.12,13

Third, our markup estimates show a strong negative cross-sectoral correlation between

median markups and markup skewness (Figure 2, right-hand panel). We compute the

markup skewness using the octile skewness measure, which is robust to outliers and is

bounded between -1 and 1 (Hinkley, 1975). Sectors where the median markup is higher

display a stronger left tail asymmetry, suggesting that the mass of the high sectoral median

markup distribution is concentrated on the right, as opposed to uniformly higher markups

over the whole distribution. This relationship holds for both industry-related sectors as

well as for services-related sectors.

12For ”Mining”, ”Wholesale Trade” and ”Retail Trade” the revenue-weighted standard deviations are

equal to 0.17, 0.15 and 0.16, and the revenue-weighted averages to 0.8, 0.9 and 1.1, respectively.

13It is important to note that having aggregated markup distributions at the 2-digit level, our dispersion
measures capture, not only the within-sector dispersion at the 3-digit level but also differences in average
markups across 3-digit sectors that belong to a single sectoral aggregate, which are also likely to be significant.

12

.511.52Markup MiningConstructionManufacturingWholesale TradeRetail TradeTransportation & WarehousingInformationProfessional, Scientific, and Technical ServicesAdministrative and Support and Waste ManagementHealth Care & Social AssistanceArts, Entertainment, and RecreationAccomodation & Food ServicesOther Services (except Public Administration)Sectoral Markup DistributionFigure 3: The distribution of markups over time. The left-hand panel of the Figure shows the time
evolution of the revenue-weighted median and mean firm-level markup. The right-hand panel shows
the time evolution of the P–10, P–25, P–75 and P–90 markup quantiles. Markup quantiles are computed
weighing firm-level markups using firm-level revenues. All quantiles are rebased at 100 in 1998.

Finally, we examine in Figure 3 the evolution of the distribution of the estimated

markups over time.

In the left-hand panel, we show that both the average as well as

the median markup have stayed relatively constant from 1999 up until 2019. There has

been a slight upward trend in the average and median markup from 2003 to roughly 2008

after which the trend reversed, but all within the bandwidth of 5% relative to the base.

However, upon examining the full distribution displayed in the right-hand panel, distinct

patterns emerge for the upper and lower tails, pointing to diverging trends. The most

upper tail of the distribution, i.e. the 90th percentile, has been on the rise, whereas the two

lower tails, the 25th and the 10th percentile, have been falling somewhat over time. In other

words, the dispersion in the distribution of markups has increased since 1999.

In Figure A.3 we provide a similar time series, but this time unweighted. Also in this

series, we observe that the 90th percentile has been following an upward trend although

less pronounced than in the revenue-weighted series. This implies that especially the

larger firms have gained in markup in the 90th percentile. The observation that the 90th

percentile has been the main driver of a markup increase is in line with previous literature,

including De Loecker et al. (2020).

13

9095100105110Markup (Indexed) 19992001200320052007200920112013201520172019YearP50AverageTime Evolution of Average and Median Markup90100110120130Markup (Indexed) 19992001200320052007200920112013201520172019YearP10P25P75P90Time Evolution of Markup Quantiles3 Oil shocks and PPI inflation

To estimate how prices at the sector-level respond to cost shocks and how this response
depends (if at all) on markups charged by firms in different sectors, we use empirically

identified structural shocks and estimate a set of cross-sector panel local projections `a la

Jorda (2005). Following the literature14, we rely on identified global oil supply shocks

from Baumeister and Hamilton (2019), available on a monthly frequency. Such oil supply
shocks are defined as unpredictable interruptions / expansions to global oil production,

whose cause could be related to the start or the end of wars, the occurrence of bad

weather conditions or the imposition or relaxation of export limits by large oil producing
countries.15,16

Figure A.4 provides some descriptive statistics as well as the density plot for the

monthly oil supply shock series. As one would expect, the mean and median of the oil

supply shocks are about zero, while the inter-quartile range and the standard deviation

are comparable (1.07 vs. 1.05). In addition, oil supply shocks are roughly symmetrically

distributed, even if the skewness is slightly positive, as reflected by the relatively large

number of mid-sized positive oil supply shock in the right-hand panel of Figure A.4.

The time series of the oil supply shock is displayed in Figure 4, left-hand panel. The grey

highlighted area represents the global financial crisis (GFC) and the yellow highlighted

areas denote other notable events for oil markets. At the start of the sample period, oil
prices were heavily affected by the Asian financial crisis. A combination of stagnating

demand and excess supply caused oil prices to drop significantly. During 1998 and 1999,

the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) announced various supply

cuts, leading to multiple negative supply shocks. In September 2001, the period of relative
price stabilization came to an end with the 9/11 attacks. The turmoil in the oil market

14See for instance Kouvavas et al. (2021).
15The oil shocks are estimated using a 4-variable Bayesian Structural Vector Autoregression (SVAR) model
which provides a flexible empirical framework that nests frequentist identification strategies as a special
case. The four variables are global oil production, real oil prices, global real economic activity and oil
inventories, the oil supply shock being the residual to the first equation. As is clear, these shocks do not
embed any sector- or firm-level information, which could otherwise invalidate our identification strategy.

16We choose to focus on global oil supply shocks and abstract from global oil demand shocks, which
Baumeister and Hamilton (2019) also provide, as the latter are likely to pick up global demand shocks, and
could hence affect prices independently of the cost channel.

14

continued at the end of 2002 with the Venezuelan oil field strikes, as reflected by the strong

negative supply shock, and lasted up until 2003 with the onset of the Iraq war.

Figure 4: Oil supply shocks and oil prices. The left-hand panel plots the time series of the monthly oil
supply shocks. The grey highlighted area denotes the global financial crisis. The yellow highlighted areas
indicate other notable events which have strongly affected the oil price development, all of which are listed
at the top of the graph. The right-hand panel shows the relationship between the monthly oil supply shocks
and the monthly growth rate of the West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil price – deflated using US CPI. It
makes use of the binscatter command, with the monthly oil supply shocks divided into 40 equal-sized bins.

The 2007 to 2008 time frame was characterized by a longer period of negative oil

supply shocks. During this period, global oil production was mostly flat, while global oil

demand was particularly strong, sending oil prices up to almost 150 US $ a barrel. The

price run-up came to an end in mid-2008, when the global economy entered in recession,

and Brent crude oil price plummeted all the way down to 40 US $ per barrel at the turn

of 2009. The next geopolitical event hitting the oil market came a few years later with

the Arab uprisings in 2011. The growing unrest caused uncertainty about the oil supply

development, pushing the oil supply shocks in negative territory.

The next episode of positive oil supply shocks came only in 2014, when global oil

supply was particularly strong while global oil demand was rather weak. Baumeister and

Hamilton (2019) show that both supply and demand developments played a significant

role in the oil price collapse during 2014-2016. The final major oil supply disruption in

our sample period was caused by the Saudi oil attack in September 2019, as shown by the

large negative spike in the left-hand panel of Figure 4.

The right-hand panel of Figure A.4 plots the relationship between the oil supply shock

and the monthly growth rate of the West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil price — deflated

15

−4−2024 Asian      crisis         OPEC   supply   cutsVenezuelan crisisand Iraq warGFCArabuprisingsOvercapacitySaudi droneattack1997m12000m12003m12006m12009m12012m12015m12018m1Oil supply shocks−12−9−6−3036912Real WTI oil price growth (%)−3−2−10123Oil supply shocksOil supply shocks and real WTI oil price growth (%) using US CPI.17 The negative correlation displayed in the panel confirms that positive oil

supply shock are associated with lower growth in the real WTI oil price. Quantitatively, a

unitary —approximately one standard deviation— monthly oil supply shock is on average

associated with a 4.4 percentage points decrease in the growth rate of the real price of oil

over the same period.

Last to investigate the link between cost shocks, markups and prices, we rely on

sectoral inflation, defined as the growth rate of the seasonally-adjusted monthly series

of the Producer Price Index (PPI) for the years 1998 to 2019. We do so for all sectors at

the 3-digit NAICS level, which yields us in the end a total of 46 industries after merging

the PPI data with the sectoral markup data. The summary statistics of the annual PPI

growth rate per sector can be found in Table A.1. On average, sectors have a PPI growth

rate of 0.2%. Sectors with significant price fluctuations are ”Petroleum and Coal Products

Manufacturing”, ”Electronics and Applicance Stores” and ”Gasoline Stations”.

17The right-hand panel of Figure A.4 makes use of the binscatter command, with the monthly oil supply

shocks divided into 40 equal-sized bins.

16

4 Markups and the sectoral pass-through of oil shocks

In this section, we estimate the pass-through at the sector-level of oil shocks to PPI inflation,

allowing it to depend on the initial markup in the sector.

4.1 Empirical specification

To test for the possibility that high markups can cushion cost-push shocks, we run a set
of regressions where the dependent variable is inflation in sector s between t and t + h,
denoted ps,t+h − ps,t, in what follows. On the right-hand side, we use as explanatory

variables, the oil shock at month t denoted OILt, and a measure of the revenue-weighted
median markup in sector s, which we lag one year and denote µs,t−1

In addition, to

18.

test for the cushioning hypothesis, we include the interaction between the monthly oil
shock OILt and the measure of the sectoral markup µst−1 to allow the sensitivity of sectoral

inflation to the oil shock to change with the sectoral markup. Finally, we also include in

our specification lagged PPI inflation as a control variable, with lags going from 1 to 12

months.

To estimate our baseline regression, we follow two alternative approaches. In the first,

we rely on a standard linear interaction term between the oil shock and the sectoral markup

itself. Our second approach creates indicator variables for low, medium and high sectoral

median markups. For example, the dummy variable for the low (high) sectoral markup is

equal to one for sectors whose markup on a given year belongs to the lower (upper) tercile
of the distribution of sectoral markups on that year. In each of these different specifications,
we include sector fixed effects θs and run specifications with and without time dummies
λt. The year-month dummies help us to control for any aggregate developments, such as

overall inflation of GDP growth.

With µs,t−1 denoting the yearly sectoral median markup at time t − 1, the first variant

of the baseline empirical specification with the standard linear interaction term writes as:

18As the markup frequency is annual, t − 1 represents the previous year for sectoral markups and not the
previous month. To be precise, if an oil shock hits in July 2011, then we take the pre-determined sectoral
markup of 2010, estimated based on a three-year backward-looking rolling window as described in the 2.2
Data section.

17

ps,t+h − ps,t =

12(cid:88)

j=0

ρ j,h∆ps,t−j + β

1,hµs,t−1

+ β

2,hOILt + β

3,hOILtµs,t−1

+ θs,h + λt,h + ϵs,t+h

(7)

In the second specification, we use the interaction term between the oil supply shock

and the indicator variables for the markup terciles. In particular, the variable 1µs,t−1
t−1)
represents an indicator that takes the value one when the sectoral markup µst−1 lies between
the xth and the yth percentiles of the yearly distribution of sectoral markups:

∈(µX
t−1

,µY

ps,t+h − ps,t =

12(cid:88)

j=0

ρ j,h∆ps,t−j + βlow
1,h

+ βlow

2,h OILt + [βmed
3,h

+ βmed

4,h OILt]1µs,t−1

∈(µ33
t−1

,µ67

t−1)

(8)

+[βhigh
5,h

+ βhigh

6,h OILt]1µs,t−1

∈(µ67
t−1

,µ100
t−1)

+ θs,h + λt,h + ϵs,t+h

We first run regressions using as a dependent variable one-year ahead PPI inflation,
i.e. for h = 12. Thereafter, we investigate the full time dynamics, considering PPI inflation

from 1 to 36 months ahead.19

4.2 Estimation results

We first discuss the empirical results based on estimations of regressions (7) and (8) using

the oil supply shock and the median sectoral markup.

Columns (1) and (2) of Table 1 show that positive oil supply shocks are associated with

significant lower PPI inflation at a 12 month horizon, but less so in sectors where the median

markup is higher. To illustrate, we can take a high and a low median markup sector, defined

at the 10th and 90th percentile of our sectoral markup distribution, and with markups of 0.8

and 1.6 respectively. Column (1) shows that for the high-markup sector, the PPI inflation

is reduced by -1 percentage points following a 10 percentage points decrease in real oil

price growth20, and by -2.4 percentage points for the low-markup sector, reflecting a 1.4

19As is clear from specifications (7) and (8), the oil shock variable OILt and the time dummies λt,h are
perfectly colinear. Hence the oil shock variable OILt matters only insofar as the time dummies are not
included in the regression.

20In Figure A.4 we show that a one-unit increase in an oil supply shock is on average associated with a

18

percentage points difference. Differences in sectoral markups therefore make a significant
difference as to how much of the oil shock is passed onto sectoral inflation. This result is

robust to including time dummies (column (2)).

Dependent variable: 1-year PPI inflation

Oil supply shock

Oil supply shock × Sectoral markup

Oil supply shock × Medium sectoral markup

Oil supply shock × High sectoral markup

Observations
R-squared
Number of industries
Industry FE
Year-month FE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-1.630***
(0.473)
0.739***
(0.263)

0.806***
(0.267)

-1.078***
(0.298)

0.449*
(0.242)
0.524**
(0.211)

0.458*
(0.245)
0.532**
(0.213)

8,185
0.073
46
Yes
No

8,185
0.190
46
Yes
Yes

8,185
0.076
46
Yes
No

8,185
0.193
46
Yes
Yes

Table 1: The dampening effect of markups on the pass-through of oil shocks. This table presents estimation
results from specification (7). The unit of observation is sector s, month t. The dependent variable is ∆PPI 1y
which is defined as the log change in PPI from t to t + h with h equal to 12. Oil supply shock is an oil supply
shock in month t. Sectoral markup is the sectoral revenue-weighted median markup the year before the oil
supply shock. Med and high median sectoral markup denote the dummy variables for the medium and the high
terciles for sectoral median markups the year before the oil supply shock. The uninteracted Sectoral markup
and Med and high median sectoral markup terms and the lagged sectoral inflation terms are included in the
estimation but not reported for brevity. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Similarly, estimation results based on the empirical specification including the tercile

dummies confirm the main result (columns (3) and (4)). Columns (3) and (4) of Table 1 show

that sectoral inflation responds negatively to positive oil supply shocks (first row), but that

the sensitivity of PPI inflation to oil supply shocks is lower when the sectoral markup is

higher, i.e. when it belongs to the higher terciles of the cross-sectoral distribution (third

and fourth row). To give an order of magnitude, the pass-through of oil supply shocks to

1-year ahead PPI inflation is roughly cut by half for sectors whose median markup is in the

third tercile of the cross-sectoral distribution of markups, relative sectors whose median

markup is in the first tercile of the cross-sectoral distribution. The results in column (3)

indicate that when an oil supply shock hits the economy which represents a 10 percentage

4.4 percentage point decrease in the oil price growth. Thus, a 10 percentage points decrease in real oil price,
translates into an additional positive oil supply shock of roughly 2.27.

19

points cut in real oil price growth, the PPI inflation is reduced by -2.4 percentage points

for sectors whose median markup is in the first tercile of the cross-sectoral distribution

of markups, whereas the PPI inflation is reduced by -1.3 percentage points for sectors in
the third tercile.21 Column (4) again shows that this effect is robust to the inclusion of
year-month fixed effects and thus to macro-economic shocks at time t.

Figure 5: High markups reduce the pass-through of oil supply shocks to sectoral inflation. The figure
shows the oil supply shock pass-through to 1-year ahead sectoral inflation across the sectoral median markup
distribution. The oil supply shock corresponds to a 1 percentage point decrease in the growth rate of real oil
prices.

Our regression results from the specification using the linear interaction allow us to
examine the dampening effect in pass-through for the full sectoral markup distribution.

Using Figure 5, we can gain several additional insights. First, using as a benchmark the

case of a sector whose markup is 1, and using the rule of thumb linking the growth rate of

the real WTI oil price and oil supply shock, an oil supply shock amounting to a 1 percentage

point reduction in the real WTI price of oil typically translates into a -0.2 percentage point

reduction in sectoral inflation one year later, an arguably large pass-through. Since our

median markup is about 1.1, this means that, at the aggregate level, the pass-through from

oil supply shocks to PPI inflation is close to 20%. Second, we learn that in sectors where the

median markup is relatively high, i.e. about 1.9 and above, oil supply shocks do not have

21These magnitudes thus reflect a 1.1 percentage points difference in the effect of a 10 percentage points

decrease in real oil prices for high-markup sectors relative to low-markup sectors.

20

−.3−.2−.10.1Percentage points.911.11.21.31.41.51.61.71.81.922.1Sectoral markupNote: Dashed lines represent 10% confidence bands around mean estimates. The oil supply shockcorresponds to a 1 percentage point decrease in the growth rate of real oil price.1−year response to an oil supply shockSectoral PPI inflationany significant impact on 1-year ahead sectoral inflation, as the estimated pass-through

then shrinks to zero.

4.2.1 How persistent is the impact of oil shocks on PPI inflation?

Up to now, we have focused on the impact of oil shocks on inflation over the subsequent
12 months. We extend the analysis by examining the effect at different time horizons

within the 12-month period and by going beyond that. Table 2 reports the response of PPI

inflation to oil supply shocks for 3 to 24-months ahead.

Dependent variable: Sectoral PPI Inflation h-months ahead

Time horizon h in months

Oil supply shock

Oil supply shock × Sectoral markup

(1)
3

(2)
6

(3)
12

(4)
24

(5)
3

(6)
6

(7)
12

(8)
24

-0.670***
(0.226)
0.280**
(0.141)

-1.137***
(0.364)
0.525***
(0.199)

-1.630***
(0.473)
0.739***
(0.263)

-1.437**
(0.642)
0.638*
(0.372)

0.344**
(0.154)

0.617***
(0.221)

0.806***
(0.267)

0.700**
(0.339)

Observations
R-squared
Number of industries
Industry FE
Year-month FE

8,608
0.066
46
Yes
No

8,467
0.057
46
Yes
No

8,185
0.073
46
Yes
No

7,621
0.116
46
Yes
No

8,608
0.137
46
Yes
Yes

8,467
0.156
46
Yes
Yes

8,185
0.190
46
Yes
Yes

7,621
0.252
46
Yes
Yes

Table 2: Markups and pass-through dynamics. This table presents estimation results from specification
(8). The unit of observation is sector s, month t. The dependent variable is ∆PPI t + h which is defined as the
log change in PPI from t to t + h with h ranging from 3 to 24. Oil supply shock is an oil supply shock in month
t. Sectoral markup is the revenue-weighted sectoral median markup the year before the oil supply shock. The
uninteracted Sectoral markup term and the lagged sectoral inflation terms are included in the estimation but
not reported for brevity. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.

From columns (1)-(4), we can get two main results. On the one hand, oil supply shocks

have a significant impact on sectoral inflation up to two years ahead. However, as would
be expected, the magnitude of the effect first gradually increases and then diminishes over

time. On the other hand, sectors where firms charge higher markups typically display
a lower pass-through of oil shocks to PPI up to two years ahead, the dampening effect

of markups relative to the oil supply shocks being fairly constant over this three-year

horizon. Quantitatively, the results in column (4) imply that for an oil supply shock that

cuts the growth rate of WTI real oil prices by 10 percentage points, the PPI inflation pass-

through 2-years ahead is attenuated by roughly 1.2 percentage points for a high-markup

21

sector relative to a low-markup sector.22 In addition, introducing time effects, and focusing
on the difference-in-difference effect, columns (5)-(8) show that sectors where firms charge

higher markups typically tend to respond significantly less to oil shocks than sectors where

firms charge lower markups, this being true up to two years ahead.

Figure 6 shows the full time dynamics of the pass-through of oil shocks to PPI inflation

up to 36 months ahead, again considering two sectors, one with a markup at the 90th

percentile of the cross-sectoral distribution of markups and one with a markup at the

10th percentile of the cross-sectoral distribution of markups. In addition, we consider this

time a positive oil supply shock corresponding to a one percentage point decrease in the

real WTI oil price. The left-hand panel shows that the overall pass-through of oil shocks

gradually increases with time and peaks after about 15 months for both high and low-

markup sectors. 15 months is also the horizon over which the pass-through of oil shocks
to PPI inflation in high- and low-markup sectors are significantly different.23

Figure 6: Markups and tynamics of oil shocks pass-through to sectoral inflation The left-hand panel
shows the 1-year ahead pass-through of oil supply shocks for high and low-markup sectors defined at the
90th and 10th percentile. The right-hand panel provides a similar graph but only based on a sub-sample
of oil dependent industries, including mining, manufacturing and transportation. The oil supply shock
corresponds to a 1 percentage point decrease in the growth rate of real oil prices.

The right-hand panel in Figure 6 displays the pass-through of oil supply shocks to

PPI inflation, focusing on oil dependent industries, i.e. mining, manufacturing and trans-

22As in the previous section, the high and low-markup sectors are defined at the 90th and 10th percentile
of the sectoral markup distribution, with a sectoral markup of 1.6 and 0.8 respectively. These definitions are
used throughout the text, unless stated differently.

23Note that the difference-in-difference is still significant up to 36 months ahead. The shorter horizon over
which the pass-throughs displayed in Figure 6 are significantly different from each other simply reflects the
standard error on the coefficient on the oil shock variable.

22

−.4−.20.2Percentage points0122436Monthly horizonHigh sectoral markupLow sectoral markupNote: Inflation response in percentage points. Dashed lines represent 10% confidence bandsaround the mean estimate. The positive oil supply shock corresponds to a 1 percentage pointsdecrease in the growth rate of real oil price.Forward cumulative response to an oil supply shockSectoral output price inflation−.4−.20.2Percentage points0122436Monthly horizonHigh sectoral markupLow sectoral markupNote: Inflation response in percentage points. Dashed lines represent 10% confidence bandsaround the mean estimate. The positive oil supply shock corresponds to a 1 percentage pointsdecrease in the growth rate of real oil price.Forward cumulative response to an oil supply shockSectoral output price inflation of oil dependent industriesportation sectors. Pass-through estimates are qualitatively similar to those displayed in

the left-hand panel which includes all sectors, confirming that sectors with little exposure

to oil shocks play a relatively minor role in our results.

4.2.2 Markups or energy intensity?

Firms from different sectors charge different markups, but firms from different sectors also
differ in how much they rely on energy as an input. So if firms charging high markups
happen to be operating in sectors with barely any reliance on energy, the dampening effect

of high markups on the pass-through of oil shocks could simply reflect that sectors relying

less on energy naturally display a lower pass-through of oil shocks. To ensure that high
sectoral markups, not low energy intensity drive the dampening effect of oil supply shocks

on PPI inflation, we augment our data set with input data from the U.S. Bureau of Economic

Analysis (BEA), which describes the intermediate inputs that are used by industries in their

production of goods and service. We construct the variable Energy intensitys,t by taking an

industry’s energy input as a proportion of the total intermediate inputs that an industry

consumes in a year. Using this variable and the interaction term with the oil supply shock

variable, we revisit specification (8) and run a horse race against the interacted markup
µs,t−1 and oil supply shock in the specification below:

ps,t+h − ps,t =

12(cid:88)

j=0

ρ j,h∆ps,t−j + β

1,hµs,t−1

+ β

2,hOILt + β

3,hEnergy intensitys,t

(9)

+β

4,hOILtµs,t−1

+ β

5,hOILt Energy intensitys,t + θs,h + λt,h + ϵs,t+h

Table 3 provides estimation results when we allow both markups and energy intensity
to affect the pass-through of oil supply shocks to PPI inflation. Columns (1) and (2)
show that the dampening effect of high markups on the pass-through of oil shocks to PPI

inflation is robust to controlling for sectoral energy intensity. Regression results in column
(1) —based on a specification without time effects— show that energy intensity does not

have any significant impact on the pass-through of oil shocks to PPI inflation. Conversely,
with time effects —the regression then estimates difference-in-difference effects—, both
the sectoral markup and the sectoral energy intensity affect significantly the pass-through

23

of oil shocks to PPI inflation (column (2)).

Dependent variable: 1-year ahead PPI inflation XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Oil supply shock

Oil supply shock × Sectoral markup

Oil supply shock × Sectoral energy intensity

Oil supply shock × Sectoral energy intensity
× Sectoral markup

Observations
R-squared
Number of industries
Industry FE
Year-month FE

-1.333***
(0.482)
0.583**
(0.270)
-0.013
(0.009)

0.660**
(0.269)
-0.014*
(0.008)

8,185
0.079
46
Yes
No

8,185
0.191
46
Yes
Yes

-0.946*
(0.536)
0.222
(0.333)
-0.085**
(0.040)
0.071**
(0.033)

8,185
0.080
46
Yes
No

0.423
(0.331)
-0.062*
(0.034)
0.046*
(0.027)

8,185
0.191
46
Yes
Yes

Table 3: Markups vs. energy intensity as drivers of oil shocks pass-through. This table presents estimation
results from the adjusted specification (8). The unit of observation is sector s, month t. The dependent variable
is ∆PPI 1y which is defined as the log change in PPI from t to t + h with h equal to 12. Oil supply shock is
an oil supply shock in month t. Sectoral markup is the sectoral revenue-weighted median markup the year
before the oil supply shock. Energy intensity is the sectoral energy input divided by the total inputs in
the year of the oil supply shock and is expressed as a percentage. The uninteracted Sectoral markup and
Energy intensity term, as well as the various interactions and the lagged sectoral inflation terms are included
in the estimation but not reported for brevity. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

The magnitudes of the coefficients on the interaction terms between oil shocks on the

one hand and the sectoral median markup and the sectoral energy intensity are comparable

across the two specifications but are opposite in sign. Using the results of column (1), an

oil supply shock that cuts the growth rate of WTI real oil prices by 10 percentage points

dampens the PPI inflation pass-through in a high-markup sector by roughly 1.1 percentage

points relative to a low-markup sector.2425 Conversely, columns (1) and (2) shows that the

same shock hitting a high energy intensity sector would increase the PPI inflation pass-

through by 0.5 percentage points relative to a sector whose energy intensity is low.

In Columns (3) and (4) we go one step further and introduce a triple interaction term

to Specification (9), interacting the oil supply shock with the sectoral energy input and the

sectoral median markup. The augmented specification writes as follows:

24As for high and low-markup sectors, we define a high (low) energy intensive sector as a sector whose
energy intensity is at the 90% (10%) percentile of the cross-sectoral distribution of energy intensity. The
energy intensity of a high (low) energy intensive sector is equal to 17.7% (1.2%).

25The differential effect has a standard error of 0.49 and is significant at the 5% level.

24

ps,t+h − ps,t =

12(cid:88)

j=0

ρj,h∆ps,t−j + β

1,hµs,t−1

+ β

2,hOILt + β

3,hEnergy intensitys,t

(10)

+ β

4,hµs,t−1 Energy intensitys,t + β

5,hOILtµs,t−1

+ β

6,hOILt Energy intensitys,t

+ β

7,hOILt µs,t−1 Energy intensitys,t + θs,h + λt,h + ϵs,t+h

The results support our previous findings:

for a given oil supply shock, a higher

sectoral energy intensity increases the pass-through to sectoral PPI inflation, but less so
when the sectoral markup is higher. Put differently, high markups mitigate the impact

of oil supply shocks, especially in energy intensive sectors. Quantitatively, using our

results from column (3), it means that when you consider an oil supply shock that cuts

the growth rate of WTI real oil prices by 10 percentage points, PPI inflation is cut by

2.9 percentage points for a high energy intensity, low-markup sector. In contrast, a high

energy intensity, high-markup sector experiences a cut of only 0.2 percentage points, which

is even statistically indistinguishable from zero. This further confirms our findings that

markups mitigate the pass-through of real WTI oil price reductions and that our results

are driven by the high energy intensive sectors.

4.3 The pass-through of positive and negative oil supply shocks

Thus far, we have shown that the pass-through of oil shocks to PPI inflation tends to be

smaller in sectors where firms charge higher markups. The question that naturally follows

is whether high markups uniformly reduce the pass-through of oil shocks or whether
they affect the pass-through of positive or negative oil shocks differently? To test for the
possibility that markups have asymmetric effects on the pass-through of oil shocks, we
split oil shocks into positive and negative, and allow markups to affect their respective
pass-through differently. Denoting OILp positive (dis inflationary) oil supply shocks, and
OILn, negative (inflationary) supply shocks, the extended empirical specification writes

as:

25

ps,t+h − ps,t =

12(cid:88)

j=0

ρ j,h∆ps,t−j 