Finance and Economics Discussion Series

Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
ISSN 1936-2854 (Print)
ISSN 2767-3898 (Online)

Land development and frictions to housing supply over the
business cycle

Hyunseung Oh, Choongryul Yang, Chamna Yoon

2024-010

Please cite this paper as:
Oh, Hyunseung, Choongryul Yang, and Chamna Yoon (2024). “Land development and
frictions to housing supply over the business cycle,” Finance and Economics Discus-
sion Series 2024-010. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2024.010.

NOTE: Staﬀ working papers in the Finance and Economics Discussion Series (FEDS) are preliminary
materials circulated to stimulate discussion and critical comment. The analysis and conclusions set forth
are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by other members of the research staﬀ or the
Board of Governors. References in publications to the Finance and Economics Discussion Series (other than
acknowledgement) should be cleared with the author(s) to protect the tentative character of these papers.

Land development and frictions to housing supply
over the business cycle∗

Hyunseung Oh†

Choongryul Yang‡

Chamna Yoon§

February 2, 2024

Abstract

Using a novel data set of U.S. residential land developments, we document
that the average time to develop residential properties—which includes both the
time spent preparing land infrastructures and construction—is about three years,
consistent with sizable lags in housing investment projects. We show that the
time to develop is highly dispersed across locations, a ﬁnding that helps quantify
the housing supply elasticity that is relevant for assessing local housing variations
over the business cycle. We also show that incorporating long and dispersed time
to develop into an otherwise standard housing investment model helps rationalize
some empirical facts on the housing market. Our model implies that policies to
boost housing supply are less effective in immediately stabilizing house prices for
regions where land development takes a long time.

Keywords: Housing supply; house price dynamics; residential investment.
JEL Classiﬁcation Numbers: E22, E32, R31.

∗We thank Harun Alp, Etienne Gagnon, Daniel Garcia, Greg Howard, Matteo Iacoviello, Ryan Kim, Emi
Nakamura, Joseph Nichols, Jón Steinsson, Luis Torres, and numerous seminar and conference participants for
helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed are solely the responsibility of the authors and should
not be interpreted as reﬂecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of any
other person associated with the Federal Reserve System.

†Federal Reserve Board. E-mail: hyunseung.oh@frb.gov.
‡Federal Reserve Board. E-mail: choongryul.yang@frb.gov.
§Seoul National University. E-mail: chamna.yoon@snu.ac.kr.

1

1

Introduction

Researchers have argued that signiﬁcant adjustment costs are needed in standard investment
models to account for the empirically slower response of investment to economic shocks.
Because ships and factories cannot be built in a day, these adjustment costs are typically mo-
tivated as stand-ins for the time it takes to produce new capital and the difﬁculties in adjusting
investment plans once they are in train. A strand of literature on the housing market also high-
lights inelastic short-run housing supply as a sensible feature to explain the dynamic properties
of the housing market, such as the difference in the short- and long-run housing market reac-
tions to COVID-19 (Howard, Liebersohn and Ozimek, 2023).1 Quantitatively, little is known,
however, about how long it takes to develop land and what that implies on the adjustment of
housing supply over time.

In this paper, we document the time it takes to build a house from undeveloped piece of
land across regions using a new data set and study its aggregate and cross-regional impli-
cations using a model of investment dynamics. A desirable feature of our data set is that we
observe the time it takes not only to build structures on a developed lot but also to develop land
infrastructure on a vacant, undeveloped piece of land. Accordingly, we are able to analyze the
comprehensive process of residential construction across major U.S. regions.

Empirically, we document two stylized facts on land development. First, residential land
development is indeed a lengthy process that takes more than three years, on average, after re-
ceiving a preliminary approval of the site plan from the local government, including more than
a year, on average, to develop raw land with a subdivision map into a lot on which structures
could be built. Second, the time it takes to develop land is highly dispersed across locations,
even after controlling for an extensive list of variables that are likely to affect local construc-
tion demand. In turn, we ﬁnd that a county’s median time to develop (TTD) is associated
not only with a measure of its long-run housing supply elasticity, but also with adverse local
weather conditions that hinder construction activity in the short run. This information suggests
that local factors that determine TTD are not fully aligned with the local factors that determine
housing supply in the long run.

We then use the local variations in TTD to quantify the local housing supply elasticity,
a measure that has taken center stage in the macro-housing literature. As housing wealth is
about one-third of the total net worth of U.S. households, house price changes have signiﬁcant
spillover effects to the broader economy and estimates of the housing supply elasticity are

1Many models that account for residential investment and house price dynamics rely on the assumption of
ﬁxed land supply—for example, Davis and Heathcote (2005); Kiyotaki, Michaelides and Nikolov (2011); and
Kaplan, Mitman and Violante (2020).

2

frequently used to decipher the causal effect of house price changes to economic activity.2
While the existing estimates of the housing supply elasticity mainly focus on the long-run
determinants of housing supply, we show that TTD helps quantify the housing supply elasticity
more relevant for the evolution of housing supply within the next ﬁve years. Towards that, we
elaborate a housing investment model with TTD and derive analytical expressions that relate
the short-run (up to ﬁve years) housing supply elasticity to TTD and the long-run housing
supply elasticity. Combining the model and the data, we ﬁnd that short-run housing supply
elasticities vary signiﬁcantly across counties and are indeed smaller than, and distinct from,
corresponding long-run elasticities.

We show that the consideration of relatively long and dispersed TTD in an otherwise stan-
dard local general equilibrium model of housing investment helps rationalize a number of em-
pirical facts. First, when the TTD friction is included, our otherwise standard model no longer
predicts a counterfactual, strongly negative correlation between a region’s relative price and
relative quantity in response to a common demand shock across regions. Intuitively, as lengthy
TTD lowers the short-run supply elasticity in all regions, developers in the region with a higher
long-run supply elasticity are more likely to substitute short-run supply with long-run supply
as they internalize the larger gap between the short- and long-run supply elasticities. Second,
when the autocorrelation of the common demand shock is not highly persistent, our model pre-
dicts that a region’s house price growth is better explained by the short-run supply elasticity
than by the long-run supply elasticity. Using county-level data, we regress a county’s house
price change (relative to the national house price change) on the short- to long-run housing
supply elasticities. Since the early 2010s, we ﬁnd that our short-run supply elasticity outper-
forms the long-run supply elasticity in accounting for the observed cross-county variation in
house prices.

Finally, we draw a policy implication by conducting a counterfactual exercise where the
government aims to stabilize house prices by a discretionary housing supply policy. When
TTD is present, we ﬁnd that government incentives to boost the housing supply affect house
prices through the expectations channel of future housing supply. Therefore, the policy could
be somewhat less effective in immediately stabilizing house prices for regions where land
development takes a long time, but it could be more effective in stabilizing medium-run house
prices for those regions.

2According to the 2022 ﬁnancial accounts of the United States from the Federal Reserve Board’s ﬂow of
funds statistics, the total real estate at market value for households and nonproﬁt organizations is 47.1 trillion
dollars and the net worth of households and nonproﬁt organizations is 143.7 trillion dollars.

3

Related literature. Studies on housing supply mainly focus on estimating its long-run deter-
minants (Saiz, 2010; Baum-Snow and Han, 2022; Lutz and Sand, 2022), and these estimates
are typically used to identify regional variations to economic shocks (Mian, Rao and Suﬁ,
2013; Mian and Suﬁ, 2014; Davis and Haltiwanger, 2019; Bhattarai, Schwartzman and Yang,
2021). This approach could be problematic when the economic shock of interest does not
persist in the long run and when the short-run determinants of housing supply differ from the
long-run estimates. For example, Guren, McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2020) suggest
that a puzzling feature of the cross-regional housing price and quantity correlation discussed
in Davidoff (2016) could be potentially resolved by assuming a lower short-run housing sup-
ply elasticity in all regions. Not much is known, however, about the determinants of housing
supply elasticity in a business cycle frequency, with the notable exception of Topel and Rosen
(1988), who estimate the short- and long-run elasticities of housing supply and ﬁnd that most
of the long-run response occurs within a year. We contribute to this literature by (i) quantify-
ing frictions to housing supply at a business cycle frequency based on the observed duration of
land development and (ii) studying the implications of our quantiﬁed frictions on the housing
market through an equilibrium model of housing investment. By investigating the link be-
tween new housing supply data and the elasticity of housing supply, we also complement the
literature that studies the sensitivity of local economic activity to house prices (Guren, McKay,
Nakamura and Steinsson, 2021; Graham and Makridis, 2023). Research in this topic identiﬁes
plausibly exogenous house price variations by focusing on variables of the local economy or
existing housing characteristics; we argue that data on the timing of new housing supply also
capture an important source of local variation in house prices that could be used to estimate
the sensitivity of local economic activity to house prices.

In the literature on business cycles, time to build has been noted as a key friction to in-
vestment dynamics at least since Kydland and Prescott (1982). Subsequently, several papers
document the duration of building capital using newly available data or study its implica-
tions on investment behavior (Lucca, 2007; Kalouptsidi, 2014; Sarte, Schwartzman and Lu-
bik, 2015; Millar, Oliner and Sichel, 2016; Kydland, Rupert and Šustek, 2016; Oh and Yoon,
2020; Meier, 2020; Charoenwong, Kiruma, Kwan and Tan, 2024). Our paper contributes to
this line of work, both by providing new stylized facts on the comprehensive construction pro-
cess from undeveloped land to the completion of new structures and by delivering a number of
housing market implications of the new stylized facts. Relatedly, our work contributes to exist-
ing studies of housing investment (Mayer and Somerville, 2000; Green, Malpezzi and Mayo,
2005; Haughwout, Peach, Sporn and Tracy, 2013; Paciorek, 2013; Murphy, 2018; Nathanson
and Zwick, 2018). More broadly, our ﬁndings could also shed light on the importance of

4

TTD frictions for nonresidential structures as both residential and nonresidential structures
are likely to share some common hurdles from the site development stage.

As discussed earlier, the implications of these residential construction dynamics are less
explored in the housing and macro literature. Most models that study the aggregate impli-
cations of the housing sector abstract from the dynamic aspect of land development (Davis
and Heathcote, 2005; Iacoviello and Neri, 2010). Following the spirit of Glaeser, Gyourko
and Saiz (2008), we explore the aggregate and regional implications of housing supply with a
focus on the short-run dynamics.

Structure of the paper.

In section 2, we present the land development data and estimate a
TTD measure that is comparable across regions by controlling for various factors. In section 3,
we develop a TTD model of housing investment and analytically derive housing supply elas-
ticities in each horizon. In section 4, we quantify local housing supply elasticities in the short
to medium run by using the model derivations and the empirical TTD estimates. In section 5,
we study three implications of our model for house prices and housing quantity. Section 6
concludes. The Online Appendix provides additional details and sensitivity analyses of our
theoretical and empirical results.

2 Duration of land development across regions

In this section, we use a unique data set that tracks development activities for residential prop-
erties in the U.S. to measure the duration of land development across regions. The desirable
feature of our data set is that it includes the period of site development prior to building con-
struction.

We show that the duration of land development that includes the period of site development
is lengthy and varies widely across regions. These variations persist even after controlling for
a number of observable regional demand factors.

2.1 Land development data and summary statistics

Our data set comes from Zonda, which provides data and analysis to the national residential
home-building industry. The data set is constructed from Zonda’s survey markets data, which
cover many of the major metro areas with high residential construction activity in the U.S. The
survey markets data put together a quarterly construction status survey in new home subdivi-
sions, an area containing a large number of houses or apartments to be built close together at

5

Table 1: New housing completions between 2003 and 2019

(unit: 1, 000 housing)

Total housing
Single-family housing

Zonda

7, 790
5, 939

Census

20, 020
15, 314

Coverage

39%
39%

the same time. Large subdivisions are often broken down to multiple sections, each of which
is typically built by a single-builder company. The data set displays the total number of hous-
ing units as well as other construction characteristics by sections. We have access to this data
set from 2000 to 2021.

As shown in Table 1, our data set includes a large number of new housing supply across the
U.S. Between 2003 and 2019, the data set contains 222,868 developed sections with a total of
7.8 million units of new housing. For reference, the Census Bureau reports a sum of 20 million
new housing completions in the same period, implying a 39 percent Census coverage ratio of
our data set. Our data set is not biased toward multi-unit housing development, as the Census
coverage of single-unit housing completion is also around 39 percent.3 These completions
are distributed over 318 counties in 113 core-based statistical areas (CBSAs) that represent
48 percent of the U.S. population. The average population size of those CBSAs is 1,590,428,
which is 4.7 times larger than that of the U.S. average CBSA.4

Besides the high coverage ratio, a desirable feature of the data set is that it continuously
tracks the construction status of subdivisions and sections. Land development is a lengthy
process, starting from the acquisition of land by developers and the design of a development
plan. The plan is then submitted to the appropriate municipality for a preliminary review. The
proﬁle of the subdivision is ﬁrst created and labeled as future lots in our data set when the
municipality grants a preliminary approval as a ﬁrst step in the process or, if the approval date
is not available, after Zonda reviews and veriﬁes the site plan submitted to the municipality.
During each quarterly survey, the lot remains as future lots while there is ongoing land devel-
opment, such as the site having survey stakes or equipment. It follows that the ﬁnal site plan
is submitted and approved, and the necessary permits are processed. Thereafter, the infras-
tructure for the land is developed and the lot is now labeled as active. At this stage, separate
homebuilders enter for construction projects in the active lots not pursued by the developer.

3In our data set, single-family housing units comprise 82.6 percent of the completions, followed by town-
houses (10.2 percent), condos (2.3 percent), and duplexes (1.2 percent). We show in the Appendix that the Census
coverage does not signiﬁcantly ﬂuctuate across years.

4Of the top 20 CBSAs ranked by the 2020 Census population, only 2 CBSAs (Boston and Seattle) are not

included in our data set.

6

When there is excavation activity with a slab or basement on these vacant developed lots, the
units are classiﬁed as under construction, consistent with the Census Bureau’s deﬁnition of
housing starts. After the completion of home construction, each house is classiﬁed as either
a ﬁnished vacant unit or an occupied unit, depending on its status of sales. Eventually, the
subdivision is classiﬁed as built out, and it exits the data set when the number of occupied
units equals its total units.

Based on this classiﬁcation, we deﬁne a TTD measure for each new development section.
TTD is deﬁned as the duration between the quarter when the municipality likely approves a
preliminary site plan and the quarter when the number of ﬁnished units (vacant or occupied)
reaches at least half of the total number of units. The unique feature of our data set is that
it captures the earliest stage of a completed development with a plan that is as concrete as a
preliminary map submitted to the municipality. Our deﬁnition for the beginning quarter of
TTD fully takes this feature on board; in the Appendix, we present results using an alterna-
tive deﬁnition for the beginning quarter of TTD.5 The deﬁnition for the end quarter of TTD
is consistent with the Census Bureau’s deﬁnition of the completion of a multi-unit building,
as it classiﬁes the construction of a multi-unit building as complete when half of the units
are ﬁnished. It is worth noting that the Census Bureau tracks construction time per building,
whereas we can only track construction time per section. Therefore, our measure of the sec-
tion’s construction time could be longer than the construction time of an average building in
that section if a developer decides to build structures sequentially rather than simultaneously.
In the Appendix, we study the sensitivity of our empirical results when the end quarter of
TTD is deﬁned earlier than our baseline—that is, the date at which the number of ﬁnished
units reaches a quarter of the total number of units in the section.

For the remaining analysis, we adopt the following sample selection criterion. Between
2003 and 2019, 222,868 sections were completed. We dropped 102,575 observations without
information on TTD (for example, missing start dates), resulting in 120,293 observations.6 We
further dropped 16,097 observations without lot size information or demand controls, leaving
us with 104,196 observations.

5Our baseline deﬁnition is also driven by data availability. In the data set, the preliminary approval date is
missing for many sections, which limits our sample size substantially. In the Appendix, we provide details on
how we measure the beginning quarter of development.

6Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne the start date as the ﬁrst quarter when the total number of planned units is equal to
the total number of future lots, based on Zonda’s quarterly review of newly submitted maps at the municipality.
We ﬁnd that our deﬁned start date is close to the municipality approval date of the preliminary site plan, when
the latter date is available in the data set. We dropped sections where their ﬁrst observation already had positive
active lots, as land development on these sections likely started (according to our deﬁnition) before they entered
the data set.

7

(unit: days)

Mean
Std. dev.
IQR

P10
P25
P50
P75
P90

Table 2: Section TTD statistics

Site TTD

Building TTD

Total TTD

569
760
458

91
181
275
639
1, 278

760
792
548

182
275
458
823
1, 734

1, 329
1, 077
1, 006

366
638
1, 004
1, 644
2, 922

Observations

104, 196

104, 196

104, 196

Note: Each observation is a subdivision or a section of a subdivision when there are multiple sections in a subdi-
vision. IQR stands for the interquartile range (P75−P25). Five different percentiles of each TTD distribution are
shown—for example, P50 referring to the median (50th percentile) of the distribution.

2.2 Stylized facts on the duration of housing development

The total time it takes for housing development (TTD) comprises two parts: time to develop
infrastructure at the site (site TTD) and time spent on the construction of buildings (building
TTD). Just by looking into the raw measures of TTD based on Table 2, we ﬁnd two stylized
facts on the duration of housing development that stand out.

First, housing development is a lengthy process with signiﬁcant time spent on land devel-
opment. As shown in the ﬁrst row of the table, housing development takes a total of 1, 329
days on average. While less emphasized in the literature because of limited data availability,
we ﬁnd that the duration between the land development plan approval and the ﬁnishing of
site development is substantially long, averaging 569 days. The mean construction time of
buildings on these developed sites is 760 days.

Second, there is substantial heterogeneity in the duration of housing development. The
standard deviation and the interquartile range of total TTD are both around three years (1, 077
days and 1, 006 days, respectively). The signiﬁcant heterogeneity is also pronounced in site
TTD, as its standard deviation is more than two years.

Note that the distribution of TTD is skewed to the right, as the mean is larger than the
median in all TTD measures. This ﬁnding is also evident from the lengthy TTD at the 90th
percentile.

8

2.3 Controlled measures of TTD

The lengthy and highly dispersed TTD across sections documented above could be driven by
various factors. Our goal is to measure the developers’ TTD constraint for housing devel-
opment that is comparable across locations. Toward that goal, we need to ﬁrst control for
differences in construction characteristics that are likely to affect TTD. For each development
section, the data set includes some of that information, such as the number of housing units,
the average lot size, the type of housing, and the builder(s) of each section. Indeed, these
construction characteristics have substantial variations. For example, there are an average of
42 housing units per each section, and the standard deviation is also 42 units.

The ﬁrst column of Table 3 shows the regression result when the log of TTD is regressed
on several construction characteristics in our sample. Builder ﬁxed effects are included for
the top 15 builders in our sample. Completion year ﬁxed effects are also included to abstract
from time variations in TTD. We ﬁnd that both the number of units and the (average) lot size
per housing unit are positively associated with TTD. One percent increases in the number of
units and in the lot size per unit imply 0.131 percent and 0.136 percent increases in TTD,
respectively. These results are highly signiﬁcant and consistent with the ﬁndings in Oh and
Yoon (2020), where the square footage of a single-family house under construction is shown
to be positively associated with its time to build. In terms of the type of housing, townhouses
and condos take a longer time to complete relative to single-family developments.

Even after we control for construction characteristics, TTD could also be driven by lo-
cal economic factors that are linked to the developers’ incentives in those locations. Because
our model does not feature the developer’s location choice, we would also need to control
for these factors. The second column of Table 3 adds a number of local controls potentially
relevant for housing supply—such as a Bartik-type variable that measures the local demand
pressure, indicators of sand and coastal states, population shares of immigrants and college-
educated adults, and population density—as suggested in Davidoff (2016). We also include
the annual county-level GDP in the regression to control for any country-level time-varying
economic factors. The regression results show that several of these local economic factors
are associated with TTD in a statistically signiﬁcant manner. Counties with higher Bartik de-
mand pressure, immigrant share, and population density, or counties not in sand states and
especially in coastal states, experience longer duration in development, as shown in the Ap-
pendix. Even after we control for these local economic factors, however, the R-squared shows
limited improvement over the regression in the ﬁrst column, and the regression coefﬁcients
for construction characteristics remain robust. These results suggest that local economic fac-

9

Table 3: Section TTD regression results

Variables

Log(number of units)

Log(lot size)

Single family

Townhouse

Condo

Duplex

Etc.

Builder ﬁxed effect
Year ﬁxed effect
Local controls
Local controls × Year

Constant

Observations
R-squared

(1)

0.131***
(0.00427)
0.136***
(0.00480)

−

0.208***
(0.0111)
0.191***
(0.0417)
0.0436
(0.0309)
0.0233
(0.0263)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

4.505***
(0.0505)
104, 196
0.282

(2)

0.140***
(0.00436)
0.141***
(0.00492)

−

0.198***
(0.0113)
0.227***
(0.0414)
0.0341
(0.0310)
0.0461*
(0.0261)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

4.432***
(0.0883)
104, 196
0.289

(3)

0.138***
(0.00417)
0.140***
(0.00477)

−

0.187***
(0.0112)
0.235***
(0.0384)
0.0396
(0.0293)
0.0444*
(0.0246)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:88)

5.284***
(0.184)
104, 196
0.330

Note: Regression with log(TTD) as the dependent variable. Local control variables include Bartik-type predicted
industry employment growth, indicators for sand state and coastal state, population share of immigrants, popu-
lation share of college educated, population density, and county real GDP. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

tors might play a limited independent role after taking into account the developer’s choice of
construction characteristics.

The third column of Table 3 allows for additional ﬂexibility in the time-varying response of
TTD to local economic factors by interacting the time-invariant local controls with year ﬁxed
effects. While the R-squared moderately improves to 33 percent, the regression coefﬁcients
on construction characteristics remain relatively robust across all three speciﬁcations.

10

Table 4: County-level TTD statistics

(unit: days)

Raw TTD

Reg. (1)

Reg. (2)

Reg. (3)

Mean
Std. dev.
IQR

P10
P25
P50
P75
P90

Observations

1, 044
426
365

640
822
1, 005
1, 187
1, 369

267

973
317
396

605
764
954
1, 160
1, 369

267

969
317
371

605
784
959
1, 155
1, 358

267

971
287
319

631
803
964
1, 123
1, 348

267

Note: Each observation is a county’s median TTD. We use counties with at least 10 completed sections ob-
served. IQR stands for the interquartile range (P75−P25). Five different percentiles of each TTD distribution are
shown—for example, P50 referring to the median (50th percentile) of the distribution.

2.4 County-level TTD

Using the regression results in Table 3, we now construct the county-level TTD for the repre-
sentative housing. That is, we normalize TTD for each section by assuming that the controlled
observables are at their national average values and add the ﬁtted residuals. We then take the
median of this value for each county of interest. Note that we use the median instead of the
mean, as the distribution of TTD is skewed to the right. Moreover, the median TTD should
be relatively insensitive to any remaining time-varying demand factors of TTD, such as the fat
right tail in construction time during the Great Recession (Oh and Yoon, 2020).

Table 4 presents some cross-county moments of each county’s measure of TTD. In the
ﬁrst column (“Raw TTD”), we observe that the average of the county-level TTD using raw
section TTD data is almost the same as the average of the section TTD itself. The standard
deviation and the interquartile range are sizable at 426 days and 365 days, respectively. The
second to fourth columns present the same statistics using the controlled TTD estimates in Ta-
ble 3. Controlling for construction characteristics and focusing on a nationally representative
housing development, we ﬁnd that the cross-county mean TTD is 973 days, just less than three
years. The standard deviation and the interquartile range are also sizable at around one year.
Results for the third and fourth columns are similar to those of the second column, consis-
tent with the R-squared results in Table 3, suggesting that after one controls for construction
characteristics, the marginal contribution of local demand factors is limited.

11

2.5 The geographic determinants of the land development process

Land development is a major topic of interest in civil engineering, as each construction site
poses unique engineering challenges based on soil characteristics, topography, weather, and
other physical features (Kone, 2006). As such, developers create not only a master plan design
that conceptualizes their new development at the location of interest, but also a site engineer-
ing plan that adapts the master plan design to the physical properties of the site. These site
engineering plans include (i) a grading plan that shows the elevations of grounds and buildings,
(ii) a storm water management plan that shows the volume and rate of storm water runoff, and
(iii) an erosion and sediment control plan that shows the erosion control barriers and materials
at the site. The local government regulation on development varies based on its transitory and
permanent environmental effects, and this factor also plays an important role in shaping the
engineering plans of each site.

As shown in Table 4, our county-level TTD measures exhibit signiﬁcant degrees of cross-
regional variation even after controlling for construction characteristics and local economic
factors. Based on the described process of land development, we then ask whether any ob-
servable geographic differences in engineering challenges could account for that variation.
Some of the geographic differences could be highly correlated with factors that determine
long-run housing supply described in Saiz (2010), but other geographic differences that do
not play a large role in accounting for the long-run housing supply could nevertheless mat-
ter for the duration of land development. For example, each location is exposed to different
weather conditions that might not materially affect the decision to develop land but might still
matter for the cost and duration of land development. That is, locations with extreme storm
and heat conditions could still be desirable for new construction, but severe weather will oc-
casionally delay on-site construction activity and the developer’s building design to tolerate
extreme weather conditions might further lengthen the development process.

Table 5 displays the regression result using our controlled TTD measures and the observed
geographic determinants described in this section. Both the long-run housing supply elasticity
and rainfall intensity affect TTD in a statistically signiﬁcant sense. That is, the duration of
land development is longer for locations where (i) the long-run housing supply is limited and
(ii) rainfalls are more intense, more frequent, or both. Heat also delays TTD, but its statistical
signiﬁcance is less pronounced. A careful study of these engineering challenges is beyond
the scope of this paper, but we think that the signiﬁcance of these geographic determinants in
accounting for the variation in TTD across locations suggests the potential of our controlled
TTD measure to reﬂect plausibly exogenous variations to economic shocks.

12

Table 5: County-level TTD regression results

Variables

Saiz elasticity

Rainfall intensity

Heat

Observations
R-squared

Reg. (1)

−0.162***
(0.047)
0.125***
(0.022)
0.030
(0.022)

222
0.206

Reg. (2)

−0.150***
(0.048)
0.099***
(0.022)
0.049**
(0.022)

222
0.192

Reg. (3)

−0.134***
(0.041)
0.099***
(0.021)
0.036*
(0.021)

222
0.190

Note: We use counties with at least 10 completed sections observed. “Rainfall intensity” measures the rainfall
inches per hour on a storm of one-hour duration and a 100-year return period for each county (Data source:
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Atlas 14 Precipitation Frequency Estimates). “Heat”—that
is, cooling degree days—is a measure of the year’s temperature hotness, calculated as the difference between the
daily temperature mean (the sum of the high and low temperatures divided by two) and 65 degrees Fahrenheit,
multiplied by the number of days with a positive value of this difference in a given year (Data source: National
Centers for Environmental Information’s Annual Climatological Data). Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

3 Time-to-develop model of housing investment

This section outlays the theoretical framework that ties our TTD data to the housing supply
elasticity, which is a key measure of interest in the housing literature.
In the model, the
developer makes housing investment decisions under a TTD constraint. We analytically derive
and characterize the short- to long-run housing supply elasticities as a function of several
parameters, including TTD. As our focus is to analytically formulate housing supply elasticity
based on TTD, it is important to note that our framework abstracts from the endogeneity of
TTD or other potential short-run determinants of housing supply studied in the literature.

3.1 Model description

In period t, the developer produces housing units, It, using inputs built in current and previous
periods, {Ut−p|t}p=0,1,··· ,P , based on the following TTD construction function:

(cid:33) θ

θ−1

It =

(cid:32) P

(cid:88)

p=0

θ−1
θ
t−p|t

U

,

θ > 0.

(3.1)

13

The parameter P is the number of periods it takes to complete a project from the beginning,
and θ governs the substitutability of the different stages of construction. This generalized TTD
speciﬁcation follows Sarte et al. (2015) and nests the investment assumption in Kydland and
Prescott (1982) as a special case when θ → 0.7

In turn, the developer builds construction inputs Ut|t+p at a lot where housing completions
are scheduled in period t + p for each p ∈ {0, 1, · · · , P }. These inputs are built based on a
Cobb-Douglas production function:

Ut|t+p = M 1−α

t+p−P |t+pN α

t|t+p,

∀p ∈ {0, 1, · · · , P },

(3.2)

where Mt+p−P |t+p is the housing permit in the beginning period of development t + p − P
for the lot where new housing is scheduled to be completed in period t + p and Nt|t+p is the
amount of variable construction input at that lot.

In each period, the developer purchases building permits, Mt|t+P , from the local govern-
ment at a price, qM,t, for a lot that is at the beginning stage of development. Moreover, the
developer hires variable construction inputs for each lot under development at a competitive
cost, wt. When a lot is fully developed, its completed new houses, It, are sold at a unit price,
qt. The developer’s proﬁt in period t, Φt, is

Φt = qtIt − qM,tMt|t+P − wtNt,
P
(cid:88)

where Nt =

Nt|t+p.

(3.3)

The developer builds new houses at multiple lots by purchasing building permits and uti-

lizing variable construction inputs to maximize its discounted sum of proﬁts:

p=0

max

{It,Mt|t+P ,Nt,{Nt|t+p,Ut|t+p}P

p=0}

E0

∞
(cid:88)

t=0

Λ0|t(qtIt − qM,tMt|t+P − wtNt),

subject to the TTD equations (3.1), (3.2), and (3.3). The variable Λ0|t is the stochastic discount
factor between periods 0 and t, and Et is the expectations operator conditional on information
available in period t.

7Consistent with our TTD construction function when θ → 1, we assume that It = (cid:81)P

p=0 Ut−p|t when

θ = 1. To simplify the analysis without loss of generality, we assume θ (cid:54)= 1 in this section.

14

Finally, permits are supplied by the local government and are elastic to the house price:

Mt|t+P = ¯M qγ
t .

(3.4)

This assumption is common in the literature and is consistent with the long-run housing supply
elasticity as a function of γ (Guren, McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson, 2020).

3.2 Developer’s housing supply

We denote µt|t+p as the period-t Lagrange multiplier of equation (3.2) for each p and express
the respective optimality conditions of (i) construction at each stage, (ii) variable inputs at
each stage, and (iii) building permits at the beginning stage of development as follows:

(cid:34)

µt|t+p = Et

Λt|t+pqt+p

(cid:35)

(cid:19) 1

θ

(cid:18) It+p
Ut|t+p

for p = 0, 1, · · · , P,

t+p−P |t+pN α−1
wt = αµt|t+pM 1−α
(cid:34) P

t|t+p

qM,t = (1 − α) Et

Λt|t+pµt+p|t+P

(cid:88)

p=0

(cid:35)

.

Ut+p|t+P
Mt|t+P

for p = 0, 1, · · · , P

The ﬁrst condition shows that construction at each stage is chosen such that its shadow value,
µt|t+p, is equal to its marginal contribution to the expected discounted value of the completed
house in the future. The second and third conditions equate the costs of variable inputs and
the building permit to the respective marginal products.

After log-linearizing the previous optimality conditions as well as equations (3.1) through
(3.4), we derive the following lemma that summarizes the model’s housing supply conditions.

Lemma 1 (log-linearized dynamic housing supply equilibrium) Let each hatted variable
be the log deviation from its steady-state value. The following log-linearized equilibrium
conditions summarize the TTD model of housing investment:

ˆIt =

1
B(P )

P
(cid:88)

p=0

(cid:16) ˜βα(θ−1)/θ(cid:17)p

ˆUt−p|t,

(cid:18) 1 − α
α

+

(cid:19)

1
θ

ˆUt|t+p =

1
θ

Et

ˆIt+p + Et ˆqt+p +

1 − α
α

ˆMt+p−P |t+p − ˆwt + Et(ˆλt+p − ˆλt),

ˆUt|t+p = (1 − α) ˆMt+p−P |t+p + α ˆNt|t+p,

15

ˆNt =

(cid:32)

1 − ˜β
1 − ˜β1+P

(cid:33) P

(cid:88)

p=0

˜βp ˆNt|t+p,

ˆMt|t+P = γ ˆqt,

where

Λt|t+p = βp λt+p
λt

, ˜β = β

θ

θ+α(1−θ) , and B(t) =

˜β(α(θ−1)/θ)(1+t) − 1
˜βα(θ−1)/θ − 1

.

Note that in Lemma 1, we introduced the deterministic per-period discount factor param-
eter β < 1. As such, the stochastic discount factor between period t and t + p, Λt|t+p, is
decomposed into the deterministic discount factor βp and the net stochastic discount factor
λt+p/λt.

Using Lemma 1, the following proposition derives the developer’s period-by-period hous-

ing supply choice as a function of house prices and other general equilibrium forces.

Proposition 2 (period-by-period housing supply curve) Based on the lemma and assuming
a steady-state equilibrium before period 0, we derive the following period-by-period housing
supply curve:

ˆIt =




Υt(P )ˆqt + GEt(P ),

∀t ∈ [0, P ),



α
1−α ˆqt + γ ˆqt−P + (cid:103)GEt(P ), ∀t ∈ [P, ∞),

where

Υt(P ) =

,

B(t)
(cid:1) B(P ) − 1

θ B(t)
( ˜βα(θ−1)/θ)j (cid:16)

(cid:0) 1−α

α + 1
θ
Υt(P )
B(t)

t
(cid:88)

j=0

GEt(P ) = −

ˆwt−j + (ˆλt−j − ˆλt)

(cid:17)

,

(cid:103)GEt(P ) = −

ΥP (P )
B(P )

P
(cid:88)

( ˜βα(θ−1)/θ)j (cid:16)

ˆwt−j + (ˆλt−j − ˆλt)

(cid:17)

.

j=0

All the proofs are available in the Appendix. Proposition 2 decomposes housing supply
into its partial equilibrium and general equilibrium components. The general equilibrium
component, denoted by GEt(P ) and (cid:103)GEt(P ), depends on the current and past histories of
construction wages and the stochastic discount factors. Our object of interest in this section is
housing supply in partial equilibrium, and the general equilibrium forces that depend on the
setup of the overall economy will be studied in section 5. The partial equilibrium component

16

Figure 1: Theoretical static housing supply elasticities

consists of the current housing price before the TTD constraint (t < P ) and the P -period
lagged house price after the TTD constraint (t ≥ P ). The partial equilibrium component has
a well-deﬁned static housing supply elasticity, which is Υt(P ) when t < P and α/(1 − α)
when t ≥ P . The following corollary provides us some useful comparative statics with regard
to the derived static housing supply elasticities.

Corollary 3 (comparative statics) The static housing supply elasticity when t < P , Υt(P ),
has two properties. First, Υt(P ) is positive and an increasing function of time, with an upper
bound of α/(1 − α):

0 < Υt−1(P ) < Υt(P ) <

α
1 − α

.

Second, Υt(P ) is larger when the TTD constraint P is shorter:

Υt(P ) > Υt( ˜P ) when P < ˜P .

Corollary 3 is visualized in Figure 1. As observed, the static housing supply elasticity is an
increasing function up to the TTD constraint. Afterward, the static housing supply elasticity
is determined by the parameter α, which represents the production elasticity to variable con-
struction inputs. Comparing the housing supply elasticity between two regions with different

17

TTD constraints, P and ˜P , we ﬁnd that the region with a shorter TTD constraint has a higher
static housing supply elasticity for two reasons. First, housing supply is more ﬂexible during
periods under construction, represented by area A in the ﬁgure. Second, housing supply de-
termined at the beginning period is completed earlier, represented by area B in the ﬁgure. In
turn, area A + B is the cumulative housing supply elasticity difference in the two regions. As
noted earlier, our model nests the TTD assumption in Kydland and Prescott (1982) as a special
case when θ → 0. In this case, the static housing supply elasticity becomes a step function: 0
before the TTD constraint is reached and α/(1 − α) afterward. As such, the difference in the
static housing supply elasticity across regions in Kydland and Prescott (1982) arises only after
the TTD constraint is reached in the more ﬂexible region, which is area B.

3.3 The short- and long-run empirical housing supply elasticities

Using the proposition, we deﬁne the T -horizon housing supply elasticity that is consistent
with existing empirical measures of the housing supply elasticity.

Deﬁnition 4 (T -horizon housing supply elasticity) The T -horizon housing supply elastic-
ity is deﬁned as the average of the theoretical partial equilibrium period-by-period housing
supply elasticities between periods 0 and T . Using Proposition 2 and assuming Υt(P ) =
α/(1 − α) when t ≥ P for simplicity of notation, we deﬁne the T -horizon housing supply
elasticity with P -period TTD, ET (P ), as

ET (P ) ≡

∆T
∆T

ˆIt
t=0
t=0 ˆqt

≡

1
T + 1

T
(cid:88)

t=0

(cid:2)Υt(P ) + γ(T − P + 1) × 1{T ≥P }

(cid:3) ,

(3.5)

where 1{T ≥P } is an indicator function equal to 1 when T ≥ P . Moreover, the long-run
housing supply elasticity, E∞, is deﬁned as

E∞ ≡ lim
T →∞

ET (P ) =

α
1 − α

+ γ.

By taking an average of the period-by-period housing supply elasticities, our T -horizon
housing supply elasticity summarizes the evolution of housing supply over time based on the
supply-side behavior. In the short run when T < P , housing supply elasticity is not a function
of γ but a function of TTD and other parameters of the housing construction function. In the
long run, housing supply elasticity is purely a function of γ and α; TTD is no longer relevant.
For P ≤ T < ∞, housing supply elasticity is a weighted average of TTD and the long-run
elasticity, where the latter matters more as T → ∞.

18

Of note, this deﬁnition is not the only way to characterize the T -horizon housing supply
elasticity. Depending on the endogenous forces that drive house prices, different weights on
the period-by-period housing supply elasticities might better characterize the average housing
supply elasticity over the horizon of interest. Indeed, our unweighted average of the period-
by-period housing supply elasticities might be viewed as an agnostic measure to the various
driving forces of the house price throughout the horizon.

4 Quantifying housing supply elasticities in each horizon

Using the duration of land development statistics in section 2 and our theoretical result in
section 3, this section presents regional housing supply elasticities in each horizon. We ask
whether the signiﬁcant TTD variations we ﬁnd in the data translate to signiﬁcant variations in
the T −horizon housing supply elasticities by comparing those with the counterpart long-run
elasticities. In this section, our main focus is on quantifying housing supply elasticities at
different horizons; their relevance in accounting for housing market dynamics will be studied
in section 5.

4.1 Parameterization

Recall county i’s T -horizon housing supply elasticity from Deﬁnition 4. In equation (3.5), the
elasticity E i
T (Pi) requires ﬁve inputs: Pi, γi, α, β, and θ.8 We begin by discussing the calibra-
tion of the key county-level parameters Pi and γi. First, Pi is calibrated by the county median
TTD estimate in the previous section. Note that the TTD estimate is the time span between
the approval of the preliminary site plan and the completion of the project. As such, it is in-
clusive of the county’s average time span between submitting a project for ﬁnal approval and
receiving a decision, documented in Gyourko, Hartley and Krimmel (2021). Next, the per-
mit supply elasticity parameter (γi) is derived from Saiz’s long-run housing supply elasticity
together with α described below.

For the remaining parameters, we set the time discount factor, β, at 0.99, as the model
is calibrated at a quarterly frequency. The construction labor share, α, is set at 0.385 which
implies that a county with the smallest Saiz’s supply elasticity has a permit elasticity γi at
its lower bound of zero. This value of α is consistent with our estimate of the construction
labor income of 37 percent in the KLEMS account when we assume that overhead labor costs

8Due to data availability, we assume that the time discount factor (β), the construction labor share (α), and

the elasticity of substitution across construction stages (θ) are identical across all counties.

19

are about 10 percent of the total labor cost.9 The elasticity of substitution across construction
stages, θ, is set at 0.5 in our baseline. The calibration of θ is not straightforward, but we
think a complementarity assumption (θ < 1) is intuitive, as most construction activities are
conducted sequentially on site. Another piece of evidence that tells us that θ is small is the
minor difference in our data between the number of housing units planned at the beginning
of development and the number of housing units completed at the end of development. For
example, the total number of housing units submitted at the beginning of development does
not change at the end of development for about 60 percent of the sections in our sample. In
the Appendix, we show that the regional variation of our supply elasticity measures is less
sensitive to this parameter.

4.2 The T −horizon housing supply elasticity

In Figure 2, we quantify the county-level house price elasticity for each horizon. The left panel
compares our measure of horizon-speciﬁc elasticities with the Saiz elasticity. The takeaway
from this panel is that the shorter-run housing supply elasticities are not simply a monoton-
ically smaller version of the long-run supply elasticities. While one-year (T = 4) housing
supply elasticities are close to zero and show little variability, ﬁve-year (T = 20) housing
supply elasticities show signiﬁcant variations. As T increases, the T −horizon housing supply
elasticities increase and converge to the 45 degree line that equates the long-run elasticity.

The right panel shows the standard deviation of the T −horizon elasticities for each T
normalized by the standard deviation of the long-run elasticities. The blue solid line plots
the results when we use the county-level TTD measure used in the regression (3) column
in Table 4. For example, when T = 9, our T −horizon supply elasticity is half as variable
in standard deviation as the long-run elasticity. The red dashed line plots the results when
we assume that all counties have the same TTD at the national median of T = 11. In this
case, the cross-county variation in housing supply elasticity obviously disappears in the short
run. Therefore, the difference between the blue solid line and the red dashed line quantiﬁes
the share of TTD variations in accounting for the cross-county variations of housing supply
elasticities for each T . We ﬁnd that the difference between the blue solid line and the red
dashed line remains sizable especially for lower values of T , suggesting that TTD variations
play a signiﬁcant role in accounting for total variations in each of the T −horizon housing
supply elasticity. For example, at T = 16, TTD contributes to about 50 percent of the total

9KLEMS stands for K-capital, L-labor, E-energy, M-materials, and S-purchased services; the term refers to

broad categories of intermediate inputs consumed by industries in their production of goods and services.

20

Figure 2: Supply elasticities in each horizon

Note: The left panel shows the scatter plot comparing the Saiz supply elasticity and the T −horizon supply
elasticities with T = 4, 20, 36 quarters. The right panel shows the cross-county variation of the T −horizon
supply elasticities when we use (i) the TTD measure constructed by using regression (3) in Table 3 (blue solid
line) and (ii) the median county TTD measure of 11 quarters (red dashed line).

variation in the T −horizon housing supply elasticity.

In sum, we ﬁnd that the large variations of TTD documented in the data translate to quan-
titatively sizable variations in the shorter-run housing supply elasticities. This suggests that
our shorter-run housing supply elasticities could provide a new perspective compared to the
long-run housing supply elasticity in the study of housing dynamics.

Nevertheless, our focus so far on housing supply elasticities has limitations because the
equilibrium housing market behavior is a combination of both housing supply and demand
and it is unclear whether the measured variations in supply elasticities would imply signiﬁcant
variations in housing market variables that we observe through the data. That is the topic of the
next section, where we study the equilibrium effects of short-run housing supply elasticities
on house prices and housing investment.

5 Theory and application of short- and long-run elasticities

We documented that TTD is lengthy and dispersed across counties. Mapping the empirical
TTD into our model’s analytical expression for housing supply elasticity, we ﬁnd that the
short-run housing supply elasticity is also highly dispersed across counties. As the housing
supply elasticity is derived from a partial equilibrium model of housing developers, our results

21

012345T-Quarter Elasticity (eTi(Pi))012345Saiz Long-Run Elasticity45o LineT = 4T = 20T = 36Short- to Long-run Supply Elasticity0.00.20.40.60.8Std.(eTi(Pi))/Std.(Saiz Elasticity)0481216202428323640Horizon (T)BaelineCommon TTDTTD Contribution to Elasticity Variationare not speciﬁc to the nature of economic shocks or the endogenous response of housing
demand. However, housing supply elasticity does not directly inform us about the dynamics of
house prices and quantities that are of interest in the literature. To understand its implications
on house prices and quantities, one needs to specify the demand side of housing.

In this section, we study the theoretical implications of our short- and long-run housing
supply elasticities on house prices and quantities using a local general equilibrium model of
housing investment. That is, we extend the partial equilibrium model of developers in section 3
by incorporating the household and the nondurable goods–producing sectors. After specifying
the local general equilibrium model, we hit the economy with a common housing demand
shock and study the differential local house price and quantity responses. We show that our
calibrated model predicts two salient housing market features that can be tested with house
price and quantity data. We also investigate the effectiveness of a government’s discretionary
housing supply policy when TTD is taken into account.

5.1 Local general equilibrium TTD model

The local economy consists of housing developers, households, nondurable goods producers,
and a local government. Since the national central bank sets the interest rate, we assume that
the local economy takes it as given. Therefore, the bond and nondurable goods markets do
not clear locally, analogous to the assumptions in small open economy models in the interna-
tional macro literature. Housing developers follow the same speciﬁcation and notation as in
section 3. Below, we describe the households, the rest of the economy, and the equilibrium of
the model.

5.1.1 Households

The representative local household’s expected lifetime utility is

E0

∞
(cid:88)

t=0

βtU (Ct, Ht, Nn,t, Nt; ϕt),

(5.1)

where Ct is the household consumption of nondurable goods, Ht is the service ﬂow of housing,
Nn,t is the labor supply for the nondurable goods sector, and ϕt is an exogenous process for
housing demand. The household’s one-period subjective discount factor, β, is consistent with
the housing developers’ deterministic discount factor speciﬁed in section 3.

The household’s service ﬂow of housing is proportional to its housing stock. For simplicity

22

of notation, the housing stock is also denoted as Ht. The housing stock evolves over time by

Ht = (1 − δ)Ht−1 + It,

(5.2)

where δ is the depreciation rate of the housing stock.
The household ﬂow budget constraint is given by

Ct + qtIt +

Bt+1
Rt

+

ψb
2

B2

t+1 = wn,tNn,t + wtNt + Bt + Φt + Tt,

(5.3)

where Bt+1 is the household’s one-period bond holdings that mature in period t + 1, Rt is the
gross bond interest rate between periods t and t + 1, wn,t is the real wage for working in the
nondurable goods sector, Φt is the period-t proﬁt of developers because households are the
ﬁnal owners of the developers, and Tt is transfers from the local government. As is standard
in small open economy models, the household is subject to the bond portfolio adjustment cost
ψbB2
t+1/2. The parameter ψb is calibrated to be positive for stability in solving the model but
small enough to not materially affect the model dynamics.

5.1.2 The rest of the economy

As we will discuss next, the rest of the economy consists of the nondurable goods producers,
the local government, and the market-clearing conditions. We also specify the exogenous
process for housing demand that we use for later applications.

Nondurable goods producers. The representative nondurable goods producer operates with
a linear production technology, Yt = ¯ZNn,t, where Yt is the output of the nondurable good
and ¯Z captures its productivity. The proﬁt of the producer is Yt − wn,tNn,t, where both the
input and output markets are perfectly competitive. The nondurable goods are tradable to
other regions.

Local government. As speciﬁed in equation (3.4), the supply of housing permits is deter-
mined by its local government, which in turn is elastic to the region’s equilibrium house price.
For each housing permit, the local government collects a fee, qM,t, from developers. The local
government also collects the bond portfolio adjustment cost from households. The local gov-
ernment follows a balanced budget by rebating back its revenue to the households in the form

23

of transfers Tt:

Tt = qM,tMt +

ψb
2

B2

t+1.

(5.4)

Market clearing. The labor markets for the nondurable goods sector and the construction
sector clear by equating the supply and demand of labor in each sector. The permit market
clears by equating permit supply to permit demand. The market for new housing clears by
equating the supply and demand of new housing investment. The bond and nondurable goods
markets do not clear locally as we assume that the interest rate is exogenously determined
by the national central bank. Finally, the following resource constraint of the local economy
needs to be satisﬁed:

Ct +

Bt+1
Rt

= wn,tNn,t + Bt.

(5.5)

Exogenous housing demand. The exogenous component of housing demand, ϕt, is at-
tached to the household’s preference over the housing stock Ht in the utility function (5.1)
and follows a ﬁrst-order autoregressive process in logs:

log ϕt = (1 − ρϕ) ¯ϕ + ρϕ log ϕt−1 + (cid:15)ϕ,t,

(5.6)

where (cid:15)ϕ,t is the exogenous housing demand shock and ρϕ is the persistence of exogenous
housing demand from its mean ¯ϕ.

5.1.3 Equilibrium

The local general equilibrium is a set of variables {Ut|t+p, Nt|t+p, µt|t+p}P
p=0, Mt|t+P , Nt, It,
Ht, Ct, Yt, Nn,t, Bt+1, wt, wn,t, qt, Rt for t ≥ 0 such that taking as given the endogenous
prices wt, wn,t, and qt, the exogenous processes Rt and ϕt, and the initial conditions B0 and
H−1, the following conditions hold:

1. Housing developers maximize their proﬁt subject to (3.1) through (3.3).

2. Households maximize their lifetime utility (5.1) subject to (5.2) and (5.3).

3. Nondurable goods producers maximize their proﬁt.

4. The local government supplies permits and balances its budget according to (5.4).

24

Inelastic Supply

e
c
i
r
P

C

Elastic Supply

B

Demand (D

(cid:48)

)

A

Demand (D)

Quantity

Figure 3: Housing supply and demand curves

5. Markets clear for nondurable goods labor, construction labor, permits, and housing in-

vestment, and the resource constraint (5.5) is satisﬁed.

We assume that the interest rate is ﬁxed by the national central bank. The exogenous compo-
nent of housing demand follows (5.6).

5.2 Relative price and relative quantity correlation in the housing mar-

ket

Consider two regions with different housing supply elasticities. In Figure 3, the housing sup-
ply curves of the two regions are denoted as inelastic supply and elastic supply. Assume that
the initial housing market equilibrium for both regions is at A, where the demand curve is
denoted as D. When there is positive housing demand that shifts the demand curve from
D to D(cid:48), the equilibrium price and quantity responses are different for the two regions. In
the inelastic supply region, the equilibrium is formed at C, where prices increase by a lot and
quantities increase by little. By contrast, in the elastic supply region, the equilibrium is formed
at B, where prices increase by little and quantities increase by a lot. This outcome implies
that conditional on a demand shock, the cross-regional correlation between the relative price
and the relative quantity should be negative.

In the data, however, the cross-county correlation of the relative price and the relative

25

quantity is mildly positive. Using the county house price indexes from the Federal Housing
Finance Agency and the annual estimates of the number of housing units from the Census
Bureau, we ﬁnd that the cross-county correlation of the annual growth rates of prices and
quantities is positive in 15 years between 2001 and 2019 with an average correlation of 0.13.
This discr