Finance and Economics Discussion Series

Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
ISSN 1936-2854 (Print)
ISSN 2767-3898 (Online)

Disclosure Regulation, Intangible Capital and the Disappearance
of Public Firms

Sara Casella, Hanbaek Lee, Sergio Villalvazo

2023-050

Please cite this paper as:
Casella, Sara, Hanbaek Lee, and Sergio Villalvazo (2023). “Disclosure Regulation, Intan-
gible Capital and the Disappearance of Public Firms,” Finance and Economics Discus-
sion Series 2023-050. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2023.050.

NOTE: Staﬀ working papers in the Finance and Economics Discussion Series (FEDS) are preliminary
materials circulated to stimulate discussion and critical comment. The analysis and conclusions set forth
are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by other members of the research staﬀ or the
Board of Governors. References in publications to the Finance and Economics Discussion Series (other than
acknowledgement) should be cleared with the author(s) to protect the tentative character of these papers.

Disclosure Regulation, Intangible Capital and
the Disappearance of Public Firms†

Sara Casella
University of Pennsylvania

Hanbaek Lee
University of Tokyo

Sergio Villalvazo
Federal Reserve Board

June 30, 2023

Abstract

Since the mid-1990s, the number of listed firms in the U.S. has halved,
and their public disclosure has become opaquer. To explain these trends, we
develop a general equilibrium model where the choices of going public or private
and the transparency of voluntary disclosure are characterized analytically. In
the equilibrium, the stock market with directed search and the private equity
market with random search co-exist. According to the estimation, stricter
disclosure regulation and increased intangible capital share are the key drivers
of the observed patterns. Lastly, we characterize a policymaker’s trade-off
between welfare and productivity and analyze the optimal policy.

Keywords: Intangible capital, corporate disclosures, technology diffusion.

JEL codes: D24, G24, G38.

† We are grateful to Manuel Adelino, Ismail Baydur, Santiago Bazdresch, Harold Cole, Jes´us
Fern´andez-Villaverde, Angus Foulis, Luca Guerrieri, Nicolas L. Jacquet, Ryo Jinnai, In Hwan Jo,
Dirk Krueger, Adriano Rampini, Serene Tan, Skander Van den Heuvel, David N. Weil, and the partic-
ipants in the seminar at the Federal Reserve Board, Hitotsubashi University, Singapore Management
University, National University of Singapore, Lisbon Macro Workshop, ITAM-PIER conference on
macro-finance, and BIS-CEPR WE ARE IN Macroeconomics and Finance conference for their con-
structive comments and discussions. Compustat and I/B/E/S data were obtained by the authors
prior to Villalvazo’s employment at the Federal Reserve Board, while they were PhD candidates at
the University of Pennsylvania. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of
the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System or of any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System. All
remaining errors are our own.
Casella:
scas@sas.upenn.edu.
martin@frb.gov

hanbaeklee1@gmail.com.

sergio.villalvazo-

Villalvazo:

Lee:

1

1

Introduction

Since the mid-1990s, the number of listed firms in the U.S. has decreased almost by

half. Over the same period, we document that listed firms’ performance has become

increasingly difficult to predict; reports of listed firms have become significantly more

opaque. What are the driving forces for these changes? What are their macroeco-

nomic consequences? This paper answers these questions through the lens of a general

equilibrium model of information disclosure and capital markets, where an analytic

solution characterizes a rich set of equilibrium allocations. We then use the model to

analyze the optimal disclosure regulation based on the equilibrium.

The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires listed firms to pub-

licly reveal their annual and quarterly financial information and disclose material

events such as transactions involving shareholders and insiders. Moreover, public

firms are not allowed to selectively disclose materials to some investors (e.g., Regu-

lation Fair Disclosure of 2000). Disclosure regulation aims to protect investors and

facilitate a fair capital market. However, the cost of disclosure is that it may also

reveal crucial information to competitors (Bhattacharya and Ritter, 1983). In this

paper, we show that stricter disclosure regulation and the increased importance of in-

tangible capital in production are critical factors driving public firms’ disappearance.

Support exists for the notion that private firms’ ability to avoid public disclosures

is an important factor in their decision to stay private.1 Our second key hypothesis is

that, given its nature, intangible capital is one of the most fragile input factors to the

information disclosure process. While companies may keep patents and trade secrets,

1For example, Dambra, Casares Field, and Gustafson (2015) study the effect of Title I of the
JOBS Act (Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act), which exempts emerging growth companies from
certain disclosure requirements during the IPO process and allows issuers to disclose information
exclusively to investors, but not competitors, until the IPO becomes likely to succeed. They find
that the act increased the volume of IPOs by 25% compared to their previous level; and this increase
is concentrated in firms with a high cost of disclosure, such as firms in the tech sector. Aghamolla
and Thakor (2022) exploit a shock to disclosure requirements in the biopharmaceutical industry to
show that increased mandatory disclosure requirements for private firms significantly increases their
propensity of going public.

2

some ideas are simply non-excludable: Once information about intangible capital is

revealed, then it is easily mimicked (Crouzet et al., 2022).2

Using the estimated general equilibrium model, we show that disclosure regulation

increases the welfare of risk-averse investors through more transparent information

disclosure. Regulation can, however, crowd out voluntary disclosure and even backfire

through the extensive-margin channel, as more firms tend to stay in the private equity

market, which is more opaque.3 Moreover, as firms adopt more intangible capital,

which is subject to imitation risk to a greater extent, they have a stronger incentive

to conceal information, leading to an increased tendency to remain privately held.

This technological change also leads to less transparent reporting for firms that stay

public, as observed in the data. Finally, we show that the disappearance of public

firms and overall greater opacity in financial markets substantially reduce productivity

and technological diffusion across firms.

Our approach is motivated by macro- and micro-level empirical evidence. On

the macroeconomic side, we revisit some well-known facts in the literature. The

level of intangible capital has significnatly risen, and the number of public firms has

decreased by almost 50% in the U.S. since 1996. Then, using U.S. Compustat data

and data from the Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (I/B/E/S), we construct

a transparency measure of the firm-level disclosure based on earnings surprises. Our

measure shows that the average transparency has significantly declined over the same

period of the two aforementioned trends.

2We refer to those components of intangible capital that are not well protected by specific legal
institutions and thus not necessarily patentable or patented yet. Most importantly, research ideas,
early stages innovation and R&D, software, but also certain novel business methods and organiza-
tional innovations, branding and marketing strategies, employee training, proprietary information
such as some formulas, customer lists, processes, and generally, firms’ strategies and intentions that
a public firm cannot selectively disclose.

3This is one of the core issues the SEC is concerned about. For example, in a February 2017
speech, SEC Commissioner Kara Stein posed a question regarding additional disclosures and reg-
ulation around private market investment: “We also need to understand why more companies are
staying private for longer periods of time. Should we apply enhanced disclosure laws to these pri-
vate companies? Or perhaps they require a unique set of rules.” See “The Markets in 2017: What’s
at Stake?” Commissioner Kara M. Stein, SEC website, https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/stein-
secspeaks-whats-at-stake.html

3

To investigate the relationship between transparency and intangible capital further

we run a panel regression of the transparency on intangible capital with firm-level

controls and fixed effects. We find that our measure of transparency, which is based

on professional analysts’ forecast errors, is significantly negatively correlated with the

firm level of intangible capital. This cross-sectional fact provides an important bridge

to link the two macro facts: rising intangible capital and declining transparency. We

interpret the result in the following way: the negative relationship between intangible

and transparency, proxied by forecast accuracy, can be due to two reasons: one,

firms with high levels of intangible tend to be less transparent and, therefore, more

difficult to forecast. Two, it may be that, given a certain level of disclosure and

transparency, firms with high intangible capital are inherently more challenging to

forecast due to their nature (Celentano and Rempel, 2023). Using our model, we set

out to disentangle the two forces and their effect.

In order to analyze these empirical patterns and their effect on the macroeconomic

allocations in a unified framework, we introduce a general equilibrium model of het-

erogeneous firms where financing decisions are endogenous.

In the model, ex-ante

homogeneous firms choose whether to go public or private, the level of intangible

capital stock, and the transparency of their intangible capital. The disclosed intan-

gible capital is subject to diffusion to other firms as an externality in the form of

productivity gain.

If a firm goes private, transparency is minimal, and there is no technology diffusion

to the other firms. However, a private firm must search for an investor and is not

guaranteed funding if not matched. When a firm chooses to be public, the firm

is instead subject to a disclosure obligation, composed of mandated and voluntary

components. The minimum mandated portion is enforced by the policymaker. The

voluntary portion is endogenously determined by the firm. As the household prefers

transparent disclosure, a more voluntarily transparent disclosure leads to a greater

value in the funding market. However, a more transparent disclosure undermines

4

the profitability of the firm, especially for high levels of intangible capital. This

trade-off endogenously forms a distribution of firms over the transparency domain

and determines the mass of the non-listed market in equilibrium.

One of the advantages of our model is that these decisions have an analytic so-

lution, which allows us to characterize the model and optimal policy globally and

cleanly. The model generates a general equilibrium distribution of endogenous ob-

jects in analytic form, and as such resembles the one in Burdett and Mortensen (1998).

In their model, the wage distribution is endogenously determined, as the model cap-

tures the endogenous wage postings from the firm side. Similarly, in our model,

a risk-averse representative household with CARA utility endogenously chooses the

amount of funding for each transparency level.

We then conduct a quantitative analysis of the macroeconomic effects of the in-

creasing significance of intangible assets and the impact of information regulation

policies. We estimate our model using data from two distinct periods. The first pe-

riod, spanning from 1992 to 1996, serves as our baseline, while the second period,

from 2012 to 2016, is considered as the new steady state. Therefore, we compare a

period before the dramatic shift in the number of listed firms with a period several

years after the change to assume that it has reached a stationary level.

The key structural parameters in the model include intangible capital share and

the mandated disclosure rule: the changes in these parameters change the incentive

of the voluntary disclosure operating in the listed market. We use the method of

simulated moments (MSM) to estimate the parameters, and target moments such

as the percentage of listed firms after M&A adjustment, the share of intangible-

related expenditures over sales, and the fraction of funded private firms. Moreover,

one of the advantages of our model is that it is tightly linked with the data: While

the distribution of firms’ transparency is not directly observable, the distribution of

forecast errors by analysts is both a model output and is observable in our data.

Therefore, we target several moments of this distribution over the two periods.

5

Our decomposition analysis reveals that stricter SEC regulation and the rising

share of intangible capital accounted for a large part of the decline in listed firms and

transparency. We also estimate that the same level of disclosure by firms translates

into lower information for investors in the more recent period. We interpret this as

intangible capital being inherently more opaque and challenging to understand due

to its nature, contributing to the decline of listed firms. The model also predicts that

access to funds by private investor has become easier, contributing to the reduction

of public firms. These findings highlight that stricter regulation, increased intangible

capital, and greater opacity in financial markets are important driving factors behind

the reduced transparency, number of listed firms, and productivity.

Finally, we set out to find an optimal disclosure policy. To evaluate the conse-

quences of the information disclosure policy, we provide three criteria: output, pro-

ductivity, and investors’ welfare.4 A higher mandated transparency level decreases

the incentive to go public, leading to more private firms in the equilibrium. However,

a stricter policy lowers uncertainty for investors, achieving greater welfare. In the

estimated model, a local policy change from the status quo can achieve only higher

output and productivity or higher welfare.5 From the perspective of the protection

of investors, we find that the recent regulation has substantially improved welfare.

However, we also document that it has led to a loss in productivity in the production

sector.

Contribution and literature. Our paper delivers two main contributions to the

literature. First, we provide a theoretical and quantitative model framework that an-

alyzes the effect of rising intangible capital on the firm-level financing decision.6 Using

4The mission of the SEC is “to protect investors, maintain fair, orderly, and efficient markets,

and facilitate capital formation.” See “Our Goals,” SEC website, https://www.sec.gov/our-goals.

5In the global domain of the policy, there are ranges where welfare and productivity increase

simultaneously along with the policy change. We discuss this in the policy analysis.

6Kahle and Stulz (2017) discussed the possibility of the role of intangible capital in the observed
declining trends of listed firms. However, the structural analysis of the channel has been missing in
the literature.

6

the estimated model, we show that the regulation on disclosure and rising intangible

share has been the key driver of the disappearing public firms. Also, the qualitative

aspect of our model is worth highlighting as it allows analytic characterization of rich

equilibrium allocations, including the distribution of public and private firms. This

tractability promotes the transparent illustration of endogenous mechanisms in our

model. Also, it enables a fast and accurate quantitative analysis.7

Second, we bring a novel policy angle, information regulation, to the table and

analyze its macroeconomic trade-off. From the tractable general equilibrium model,

we show that in a reasonable range of parameters, a policymaker faces a trade-off.

between welfare and productivity. We believe the analytic closed-form characteri-

zation of our model would serve as a useful tool for future research on information

regulation policy.

Two strands of the literature are closely related to this paper. The first is the

literature that studies the rising importance of intangible capital. It was only around

a decade ago that intangible capital was first recognized as an important macroe-

conomic factor that affects economic growth and the business cycle. For example,

McGrattan and Prescott (2010) and McGrattan (2020) highlight the importance of

intangible capital as a key input factor for production and show how mismeasurement

of intangible capital may mislead the neoclassical model predictions in terms of eco-

nomic growth. Relatedly, Atkeson and Kehoe (2005) and Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou

(2014) modeled plant-level intangible capital as an important input for production.

Mainly, their intangible capital refers to organizational capital that is partly firm-

specific and partly embodied in key labor inputs.

We contribute to this literature by analyzing a novel macroeconomic implication

of the rising share of intangible capital. Intangible capital has become an important

source of competitiveness, leaving firms to put great effort into research and devel-

7The portion of public firms is often substantially smaller than that of private firms in many
countries. Then a computation error of 0.1% in the portion of public firms is a significantly large
error. Therefore, a highly-computational model is easily subject to a high approximation error in
capturing the portion of large firms.

7

opment (R&D) or developing a productive corporate culture. However, intangible

capital has a strong spillover effect, which can benefit competitors as well as the

owner firm (Crouzet et al., 2022). Therefore, the rising importance of intangible cap-

ital has naturally increased a firm’s incentive to stay opaque in its disclosure. Using

our model, we theoretically and quantitatively analyze how this change affects the

macroeconomy in terms of welfare and productivity.

The second literature is about the disappearance of listed firms. Different expla-

nations have been put forward to shed light on this issue. For example, Gao, Ritter,

and Zhu (2013) point to the increase in mergers and acquisitions (M&A) among U.S.

firms; Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2017) conjecture that as markets have become

more globally integrated, the net benefits of going public in the U.S. versus in other

markets have decreased; Ewens and Farre-Mensa (2020) argue that the deregulation

of securities laws (National Securities Markets Improvement Act of 1996) improved

the private equity market, which reduced the incentives for firms to go public.

In this paper, we propose a complementary explanation. We argue that the rise of

intangible capital, especially the components of intangible capital that could benefit

competitors as well as the owner firm, has increased the cost of disclosing information

and made staying private more attractive, which is exacerbated by stricter disclosure

requirements. The estimated model also predicts that access to funds by venture

capital firms, private equity funds, and other private investors has become easier.

Finally, one of the papers closest to ours is Celentano and Rempel (2023), which

finds that the rising share of intangible capital has amplified public CEOs’ private

information compared to outside investors. This rising informational asymmetry be-

tween firm insiders and the general public leads to an increase in CEO compensation

due to the design of optimal truth-telling compensation contracts, and a decline in

the propensity of going public. We abstract from optimal contracts and the principal-

agent problem; instead, we focus on a different and complementary channel: regu-

lation on information disclosure and its interaction with intangible capital and its

8

spillover to competitors as a positive learning externality. Our model allows us to

calculate welfare and the optimal level of regulation.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes our datasets

and empirical results. Section 3 outlines the model. Section 4 describes the equi-

librium and model predictions. Section 5 estimates the structural model, conducts

counterfactuals, and describes the optimal regulation policy. We conclude in Section

6.

2 Empirical analysis

In this section, we empirically analyze the observed patterns in the number of listed

firms and the intangible capital stocks. In the firm-level analysis, the key variables are

intangible capital stock and firm transparency. We first explain our measurement of

these two variables. Then, using the measured allocations, we analyze the time-series

patterns at the macro and sector levels and the cross-sectional relationships at the

firm level.

2.1 Data and Measurement

In this section, we explain how we measure the intangible capital stock of public firms

and firm transparency.

We use firm level data on public U.S. firms from Compustat covering the pe-

riod from 1985 to 2016 to measure firm-level intangible capital stock. Our baseline

measure of internally generated intangible capital is the sum of two components: (i)

estimated knowledge capital, calculated using research and development expenditure

(XRD); and (ii) estimated organizational capital, calculated using selling, general,

and administrative expenses (XSGA). The measure is constructed using the per-

petual inventory method, which aggregates net investment flows over the life of the

9

firm:

[Knowledge capital] :

i,t = (1 − δG) kG
kG

i,t−1 + R&Dit,

[Organizational capital] :

i,t = (1 − δO) kO
kO

i,t−1 + γOSG&Ait,

where R&D is research and development expenditure expenditure; SG&A is selling,

general, and administrative expenses. All the intangible flow variables are deflated

by the price of intellectual property products from National Income and Product

Accounts data (NIPA Table 1.1.9, line 12). δG and δO are the depreciation rates.8 γO

is the fraction of selling,general, and administrative (SG&A) expenditure that adds

to the intangible capital stock. We assume γO = 0.20 following Falato et al. (2022).

All the empirical results are robust over other reasonable choices of this parameter

level.

Then, we calculate the net change in the acquired amount of intangibles from

changes in the book values of intangibles after the amortization, using Compustat

variables INTAN and AM. We obtain the acquired intangible stock kB

i,t, applying

the perpetual inventory method to the deflated net change in the intangibles.

Our final measure of firm-level intangible capital stock kI

i,t is obtained by combin-

ing the internally generated intangible stocks and the acquired intangibles stocks:

kI
i,t = kG

i,t + kO

i,t + kB
i,t

In order to get a measure of firms’ transparency, we leverage information on earn-

ings surprises. Every quarter, professional financial analysts produce and disseminate

forecasts of firms’ earnings, based on their timely access to all available information

on and off the balance sheet. Our assumption is that it is easier to forecast firms that

disclose more information, and so we can proxy firm transparency using the accuracy

8We use δG = δO = 0.15, which is around the levels estimated in the literature (Corrado, Hulten,

and Sichel, 2009).

10

of these forecasts.9

Specifically, earnings surprise ESi,j,t is defined as the difference between a firm’s

announced actual earnings per share et,i and the earnings forecast per share ϵi,j,t made

by an analyst for that firm, normalized by the price of a share Pi,t:

ESi,j,t :=

ϵi,j,t − ei,t
Pi,t

where t is the indicator of a quarter; i and j are firm and analyst indicators, respec-

tively. Thus, the surprise is measured at the analyst-firm level.

The data on analysts’ forecasts come from the I/B/E/S. The dataset collects

quarterly estimates made by professional financial analysts on the future earnings of

publicly traded companies. We closely follow Dellavigna and Pollet (2009) for the

detailed steps of the earnings surprise calculation.

Then, we define two different proxies for the transparency of the balance sheet

at the firm level. The first is the inverse of the median absolute value of earnings

surprises:

T ransparency1

i,t :=

1
median(|ESi,j,t|)

This proxy is based on the intuition that more transparent firms have lower absolute

earnings surprise, on average.10

Our second proxy is the inverse of the variance of earnings surprises:

T ransparency2

i,t :=

1
var(ESi,j,t)

The intuition behind this proxy is that more transparent firms have lower dispersion

in the earnings surprise among the analysts, on average. Therefore, the second proxy

9Forecast errors may be influenced by other factors as well, namely, idiosyncratic and aggregate
risk, analysts coverage and effort, and varying inherent difficulty of the task. We discuss how these
factors influence our analysis in the next sections.

10The median is used instead of the average, this is to rule out the outlier’s level effect on the

average.

11

is calculated only for firms with multiple analysts’ forecasts available in the data. In

our dataset, the average number of analysts covering a firm is three.

2.2 Trends in the number of listed firms, intangible capital,

and transparency

Figure 1: Time series of aggregate variables.

(a) Number of listed firms

(b) Listed firms as share of all firms

(c) Intangible/GDP

(d) Average transparency

Notes: This figure shows the trend in the number and share of listed firms, intangible capital, and
firm transparency in the U.S. Data comes from Compustat, I/B/E/S, and the World Development
Indicators. See Section 2.1 for details on measurement.

Figure 1 plots the time series of the variables of interest from 1985 until 2015.

Panel (1a) plots the number of listed firms in the U.S. The data is from the World

12

198519901995200020052010201540005000600070008000YearNumber of listed firms19851990199520002005201020150.080.100.120.140.16YearListed firms as % of all firms19851990199520002005201020151020304050YearIntangible capital stock/GDP (%)1985199019952000200520102015050100150YearTransparency Index (1985's Transparency=100)Transparency 1Transparency 2Development Indicators (WDI) by World Bank.11 As shown in the figure, there has

been a gradually rising trend in the number of listed firms until the mid-1990s. Then,

after the peak in the mid-1990s, the number of listed firms steeply declined to almost

half the level at the peak year: 8,090 listed firms in 1996 reduced to 4,102 listed firms

in 2012. Panel (1b) shows that listed firms have been declining not only in absolute

number, but also as a share of all firms in the U.S.

Panel (1c) shows the time series of the ratio between the total intangible capital

stock of public non-financial corporations and GDP. Over the thirty years, the ratio

has dramatically increased from 10% to 50%. This shows how fast intangible capital

in the U.S. has grown.

Lastly, panel (1d) shows the time series of the cross-sectional average transparency.

The overall patterns of both transparency measures closely mimic the one in the num-

ber of listed firms: transparency has increased until the mid-1990s and decreased after

the peak in 1996.12 The time-series correlation between the transparency measure and

the number of listed firms is 0.80 for the first measure and 0.61 for the second mea-

sure, and all are statistically significant. This co-movement between the number of

listed firms and the average transparency is the key motivation of this paper: what

drives such co-movements?

2.3 The trends by industries

In this section we show trends in the number of firms, intangible capital, and trans-

parency by macro industries. Panel 2a shows the trend in the number of firms for the

Information and Services sector, excluding trade and transportation, Manufacturing,

and other sectors (Trade and transportation, Agriculture and Mining, Construction).

All sectors show an initial increase and then a decline after the mid-nineties, and the

11The number of listed firms in WDI is only negligibly different from the one in the Compustat

data.

12Recessions and especially the Great Recession represent a big shocks to earnings surprises. In
order to take that into account, we also measure average transparency by excluding recession periods
as measured by the NBER, and we still find that average transparency has been declining.

13

Figure 2: Number of listed firms and intangible intensity by industry.

(a) Number of listed firms

(b) Intangibles intensity

Notes: This figure shows the trend in the number of listed firms and intangible capital intensity in
the U.S. Intangible intensity is defined as the ratio of intangible asset to total intangible and tangible
asset values. The groups are defined as Information and Services, excluding trade and transportation,
Manufacturing,and other sectors (Trade and transportation, Agriculture and Mining, Construction).
Data comes from Compustat. See Section 2.1 for details on measurement.

decline is much more pronounced in the information and service sector. We also plot

the normalized number of all non-listed firms in the information and service sector:

as can be seen, only listed firms are affected by the large decline during the entire

period of 2000 and 2010 (well after the dot-com bubble), while the overall number is

only slightly affected by the 2001 and 2008 recessions. Panel 2b shows the intangible

intensity, defined as the ratio of intangible asset to total intangible and tangible asset

values, for the same industries. Manufacturing had historically a higher intangible

intensity, which has been taken over in the early 2000s by the service sector.

Finally, Figure 3 shows our transparency measures for the information and service

sector, compared to all other sectors. The information and service sector has a lower

transparency over the entire period, and both time series of transparency for all

sectors have also declined over time.

Two main take-aways can be taken by the analysis of industry trends: the infor-

mation and services sector has seen the largest increase in its intangible intensity, and

at the same time the largest decline in the number of listed firms and in transparency.

14

198519901995200020052010201550100150200250YearNumber of firm index (1985's number = 100)GroupInformation+ServicesManufacturingOthersInformation+Services (all)19851990199520002005201020150.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7YearIntangible intensityGroupInformation+ServiceManufacturingOthersFigure 3: Time series of transparency for information and service industries.

(a) Transparency 1

(b) Transparency 2

Notes:
This figure shows the trend in in transparency for information and service industries
compared to all other industries. Information and Services excludes trade and transportation. Data
comes from Compustat and I/B/E/S. See Section 2.1 for details on measurement.

In Appendix A, we show the trends for more disaggregated industries. We also

report the trends in intangible capital using internally generated R&D only, so that

the numbers on intangible intensity can be compared to the ones available in the

Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

2.4 Cross-sectional evidence

In this section we describe cross-sectional evidence that links high reliance on intangi-

ble capital with the value of transparency and earning surprises. We run the following

regression on our baseline sample, which includes all firms in Compustat from 1985 to

2016 for which information on earnings forecasts by at least one analysts is available:

log yi,t = θt + F Es + β × Intangible over total assetsi,t + γ × Xi,t + εi,t

where yi,t is either our first or second transparency measure as described in section

2.1. θt are year fixed effects and FEs include industry fixed effects. Xi,t represents firm

15

198519901995200020052010201550100150YearTransparency Index (1985's Transparency = 100)Transparency 1: AllTransparency 1: Inform.+Service198519901995200020052010201550100150YearTransparency Index (1985's Transparency = 100)controls.13 The firm-level controls include book-to-market ratio, sales, liquid capital

(cash, inventory, and receivables), leverage (total debt over total asset), employment

in logs, age (from the IPO year), and the number of analysts. Intangible, sales, and

liquid capital are normalized by total asset.

Table 1 reports the results for the coefficient on intangible capital asset ratio. We

report the full regression table in Appendix B. The regressions show that intangible

capital and transparency are inversely related, i.e., firms that have a higher share of

intangible capital compared to their size are more difficult to forecast. Specifically, an

increase of one percentage point in the intangible capital over assets ratio decreases

the value of the first transparency by 0.31 percent, and the value of the second

transparency measure by 0.63 percent.

We interpret the result in the following way. Given the inclusion of year fixed

effects and the number of analysts covering a given firm, we can exclude the effect of

a gradual worsening of analysts’ ability and effort, analysts’ coverage, and common

changes in idiosyncratic and aggregate risk. Therefore, we can directly link the rise

in intangible capital with a decline in the ability of the market to forecast a firm.

This relationship can be due to two reasons: one, firms with high intangible intensity

tend to be less transparent, and, therefore, more difficult to forecast. Two, it may be

that, given a certain level of disclosure and transparency, firms with high intangible

intensity are inherently more challenging to forecast due to their nature. We include

both possibilities in our model and set out to disentangle the two effects using our

structural estimation.

13Firm-level controls and regression specifications are based on Li (2010) and Bird, Karolyi, and

Ruchti (2017).

16

Table 1: Regression of transparency proxies on intangibles

Dependent Variables:

Transparency 1 Transparency 2

Intangibleit

-0.31

(0.046)

-0.627

(0.096)

Industry FE

Year FE

Controls

Two-way cluster

Observations

Adj. R2

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

256,962

0.275

256,962

0.289

Notes: This table reports the estimates of the coefficients from the following regression using our

baseline sample, which includes all firms in Compustat from 1985 to 2016 for which information on

earnings forecasts by at least one analysts is available:

log yi,t = θt + F Es + β × Intangible capital over total assetsi,t + γXi,t + εi,t

where yi,t is either the inverse absolute value of earning surprises from the consensus, or the inverse

of variance of earning surprises when more than one analyst forecast is present. θt are year fixed

effects and FEs include industry fixed effects. Xi,t represents firm controls.

3 Baseline model

In this section, we introduce a general equilibrium model, where the firm-level equi-

librium allocations are characterized in the closed form. Using this model, we will

qualitatively and quantitatively analyze the cause and consequences of the empirical

patterns we have shown in the previous section.

We consider a stand-in household and a continuum of measure one of the ex-ante

17

homogeneous firms. The model is static.14 A representative household decides its

asset portfolio and consumes the payouts from the portfolio. An entrepreneur decides

in which market the firm operates between the public and private equity markets. If

a firm is listed, the entrepreneur chooses the disclosure level of the firm’s intangible

capital to the public, which we define as transparency. On the other hand, the

entrepreneur does not disclose any intangible capital to the public if a firm is private.

3.1 Household

A stand-in household decides on the asset portfolio and consumes the portfolio return.

The household is given a wealth level a > 0. The household is risk-averse, and the

utility takes the following constant absolute risk aversion form (CARA):

u(C) = −e−ΛC,

where Λ > 0 is the absolute risk aversion parameter.

In the listed market, the household forms a belief about the return (cid:101)r(q) based
on the balance sheet information of a listed firm with transparency level q and the

mandated transparency level q. The belief about the return is assumed as follows:

(cid:18)

(cid:101)r(q) ∼iid N

r(q),

(cid:19)

1
ξ + (q + q)ψ

s.t.

r =

π(q)
P (q)

,

where q ∈ [0, 1 − q] is the transparency of the balance sheet information.15 q is the

mandated transparency required by the policy maker, ξ is the baseline information

level a household has about both listed and non-listed firms, ψ > 0 is the marginal

14The model is intended to capture an equilibrium that is formed over long years. Therefore, the
dynamic aspect is abstracted. Also, the static setup gives a great degree of tractability in the model,
as will be described in the equilibrium analysis.

15The range of transparency is assumed at our convenience. However, the qualitative and quan-

titative results of this paper are unaffected by this normalization assumption.

18

contribution of transparency to the household’s information about the listed firm.16

π(q) is the profit of the firm with transparency q, and P (q) is the price of the firm

with transparency q.

In the private equity market, the household forms the following belief about the

non-listed firms:

(cid:101)rN ∼iid N

(cid:18)

rN ,

(cid:19)

1
ξ
πN
P N ,

s.t.

rN =

where πN and P N are the profit, and price of a non-listed firm. As non-listed firms

do not disclose any information publicly, the household does not distinguish one non-

listed firm from another.

Then, the household solves the following portfolio choice problem:

max
x(q),xN

E(−e−ΛC)

(cid:90)

s.t. C =

x((cid:101)q)(cid:101)r((cid:101)q)d(cid:101)q + xN

(cid:101)rN ,

(cid:90)

x((cid:101)q)d(cid:101)q + xN = a,

where x(q) is the funding supply for firms with transparency level q, and xN is the

funding supply for non-listed firms. As the model does not include the inter-temporal

decision of the household, all the payoffs from the equity investment are consumed.

3.2 Technology

A measure one of the ex-ante homogeneous firms produces output using two inputs:

tangible capital (kT ) and intangible capital (kI). In this economy, there are two types

of production technologies. One is listed firms’ production technology, and the other

16We regard ψ as the functions of a structural parameter θ, the share of intangible capital in the
production function.
Intuitively, the importance of intangible capital in the production function
affects the information quality household can access from the balance sheet. We do not impose any
structural assumption on this function. Instead, we identify the level of ψ in our estimation using
the firm-level data. Then, in the quantitative analysis, we interpret a change in ψ is affected by the
variation in θ.

19

is non-listed firms’ production technology.

3.2.1 Production function of listed firms

A listed firm i operates using the following production function:

f L(kT

i , kI

i , qi; q, Φex) = z(kT

i )α(kI

i (1 − q − qi))θ(Φex)γ,

where q is the mandated portion of intangible disclosure imposed by the policy maker,

qi is the voluntarily disclosed portion of intangible, Φex is the shared intangible cap-

ital from all other firms, z is a constant aggregate productivity level, γ is the scale

parameter for the externality, and α and θ are the tangible and intangible capital

shares, respectively. We assume α + θ + γ ≤ 1.

Importantly, we assume the revealed portion of intangible capital disappears from

the private intangible stock. This assumption is to let the revealed intangible capital

be symmetrically used between the disclosing firms and the free-riding firms without

double counting. If this symmetry is not guaranteed, partial knowledge sharing needs

to be specified, which requires an additional intensive margin in the shared informa-

tion. We simplify the model by assuming pure symmetry to avoid such complications.

We assume that a listed firm’s disclosed portion of intangibles can range from q

to 1, which does not rule out the possibility of publicly sharing nearly all intangi-

bles. Therefore, the intangible in this model does not include patents or intellectual

properties that are legally protected in terms of ownership. Therefore, we treat these

assets as tangible assets.17

We assume a firm i’s disclosed intangible qi is perfectly substitutable by the other

disclosed intangible. Therefore, the shared intangibles are aggregated in the following

additive form:

17Given these assets are even used as collateral in reality, the exclusion of them from the definition
intangible is desired for the focus of this paper. In our estimation, we target the intangible share
calculated based on the expenditures rather than the stock. Therefore, the protected intangible
assets, such as patent do not significantly affect the main results.

20

Φex =

(cid:90) 1

0



1{i∈Listed} × kI,i



q
(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)
Disclosure mandated by the policy maker

+

qi
(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)
Voluntary disclosure



 di.

A firm chooses first the voluntary disclosure level of the intangible before the

operation. The choice problem of voluntary disclosure is elaborated on in the following

section.18 The ex-post profit of a firm with voluntary transparency qi is obtained after

taking out the operational costs rkT

i + pkI

i from the revenue:

π(qi; q, Φex) := max
i ,kI
kT
i

z(kT

i )α(kI

i (1 − q − qi))θ(Φex)γ − rkT

i − pkI
i ,

where r is the capital rental rate, and p is the R&D cost per unit of intangible capital.

For the notational brevity, we assume r and p already include the depreciation rates.

3.2.2 Production function of non-listed (private) firms

If a firm is private, it does not disclose the intangible capital publicly. The production

function of a non-listed firm i is as follows:

f N (kT

i , kI

i ; Φex) = z(kT

i )α(kI

i )θ(Φex)γ.

Except for the disclosure of the intangible capital, the production function is assumed

to take the same form and parameters as the one for the listed firms. The profit is

also defined similarly to that of listed firms:

πN (Φex) := max
i ,kI
kT
i

3.3 Financial markets

z(kT

i )α(kI

i )θ(Φex)γ − rkT

i − pkI
i .

In this section, we characterize the financial market in the model. The funding supply

is driven by the representative household’s portfolio choice problem. The funding

18The assumption of timing is solely for the descriptive purpose. Even if the decision of input

levels and the disclosure level occur simultaneously, the model stays unaffected.

21

demand is determined by each firm’s value maximization problem.

3.3.1 Funding supply: The household’s mean-variance portfolio

From the i.i.d assumption of the stock return uncertainty, the consumption (income)

satisfies

(cid:18)(cid:90)

C ∼ N

x((cid:101)q)r((cid:101)q)d(cid:101)q + xN rN ,

(cid:90)

x((cid:101)q)2

1
ξ + ψ(q + q)

d(cid:101)q + (xN )2 1

ξ

(cid:19)

.

Then the investors’ expected utility maximization problem is translated into the fol-

lowing form:19

max
(cid:82) x((cid:101)q)d(cid:101)q+xN =a

− e−Λ

(cid:16)(cid:82) x((cid:101)q) π((cid:101)q)

P ((cid:101)q) d(cid:101)q+xN πN

P N − Λ

2

(cid:82) x((cid:101)q)2

1

ξ+ψ(q+q) d(cid:101)q− Λ

2 (xN )2 1

ξ

(cid:17)

.

After a strictly-increasing (log) transformation, the problem reduces down to

max
(cid:82) x((cid:101)q)d(cid:101)q+xN =a

(cid:90)

x((cid:101)q)

π((cid:101)q)
P ((cid:101)q)

d(cid:101)q + xN πN

P N −

Λ
2

(cid:90)

x((cid:101)q)2

1
ξ + ψ(q + q)

d(cid:101)q −

Λ
2

(xN )2 1
ξ

.

The first-order condition with respect to x(q) yields

π(q)
P (q)

− Λx∗(q)

1
ξ + ψ(q + q)

− µ = 0,

where µ is the Lagrange multiplier of the wealth constraint. From this equation, we

can derive the following supply curve of funding for the listed market:

x∗(q) =

π(q)/P (q) − µ
Λ/(ξ + ψ(q + q))

,

where x∗(q) is the funding supply in a dollar amount for firms with the transparency

level q. So, the household is willing to invest π(q)/P (q)−µ

Λ

1
ξ+ψ(q+q)

in the firms with transparency

19The derivation of the mean-variance portfolio objective function is as follows: consider a random

variable, y ∼ N (µy, σ2

y). Then,

E(−e−Λy) = −E(e−Λy) = −e−Λ(µy− Λ

2 σ2

y).

The last equation is derived from the moment generating function of the normal distribution.

22

level q.

Similarly, from the first-order condition with respect to xN , the funding supply

curve for non-listed firms is characterized as follows:

xN ∗ =

πN /P N − µ
Λ/ξ

.

From this point on, we assume the representative household has a large enough

wealth a, as our interest is not in the household’s constrained optimization. Thus,

µ = 0.

3.3.2 Funding demand: Listed firms’ value maximization

A manager of a firm chooses where to operate to maximize the firm’s price. The price

is interchangeable with the value of a firm. The decision problem of where to operate

is characterized as follows:

max{ max

q∈[0,1−q]

P (q), P N }.

Where P (q) is the price of the firm operating in the listed market with the trans-

parency level at q, and P N is the price of a non-listed firm.

In the funding market for the listed firms, the price of a firm, P (q), is determined

at the level where funding supply in the number of firms x∗(q)

P (q) meets funding demand

in the number of firms M(q). Thus, the market-clearing condition is as follows:

x∗(q)
P (q)

= M(q).

Recall that a manager needs to determine the transparency level, after going on the

listed market:

max
q≥0

P (q).

Given the funding demand and the market-clearing condition, this problem is equiv-

23

alent to the following form:

max
q≥0

(cid:115) π(q)
Λ M(q)

ξ+ψ(q+q)

,

which is equivalently transformed to

max
q≥0

π(q)
M(q)
ξ+ψ(q+q)

.

Now, we define a net funding intensity ϕL(q) as follows:

ϕL(q) :=

ξ + ψ(q + q)
M(q)

.

Therefore, a listed firm’s problem can be summarized as the following form:

J L(M) = max

q

max
kT ,kI

(cid:0)zkα

T (kI(1 − q − q))θ(Φex)γ − rkT − pkI

(cid:1) ϕL(q)

s.t. ϕL(q) =

ξ + ψ(q + q)
M(q)

,

where J L is the value of a listed firm given the distribution of listed firms M.20 The

solution to this problem characterizes the funding demand in the listed market.

3.3.3 Financial market for non-listed firms

The price of a non-listed firm, P N , is determined at the level where funding supply
in the number of firms, xN ∗

P N is matched with the demand in a frictional private eq-
uity market. Especially, we assume the congestion among non-listed firms generates

attrition in the funding opportunity in the following way:

xN ∗
P N = MN ,
20Note that the price P is not identical to J L, as one is a monotonically transformed version of

1
νN

the other. Specifically, ΛP (q)2 = J L(q).

24

where MN is the total number of non-listed firms and νN > 1 is a structural parameter

that captures the congestion effect in the non-listed financial market.

Then, we define a net funding intensity ϕN (q) as follows:

ϕN := ξ/(νN MN ).

A non-listed firm’s problem can be written down as follows, similar to the listed

firm’s problem:

J N (MN ) = max
kT ,kI

(cid:0)zkα

T (kI)θ(Φex)γ − rkT − pkI

(cid:1) ϕN

s.t. ϕN = ξ/(νN MN ).

3.4 Summary of a firm’s problem

A firm’s manager decides whether to go listed or non-listed before the operation. If

a firm becomes non-listed, the manager does not have to worry about the leakage of

their intangibles through disclosure. However, investors penalize the opacity of the

non-listed firms by allowing only a low funding intensity.

If a firm becomes public, the manager should decide on the level of transparency

q ≥ 0. If too many firms choose the same transparency level, it will decrease the

firm’s value in the listed market due to demand-side competition.

A firm’s problem could be summarized as follows:

[Entry decision] max{J L(M), J N (MN )},
(cid:0)zkα

[Listed firm] J L(M) := max

T (kI(1 − q − q))θ(Φex)γ − rkT − pkI

(cid:1) ϕL(q)

[Non-listed firm] J N (MN ) := max
kT ,kI

T (kI)θ(Φex)γ − rkT − pkI

(cid:1) ϕN

s.t. ϕL(q) =

q

max
kT ,kI
ξ + ψ(q + q)
M(q)
(cid:0)zkα

,

s.t. ϕN := ξ/(νN MN ).

25

4 Equilibrium

Here we define an equilibrium where the economy is given total intangible capital

reserve K I (fixed aggregate intangible supply). This equilibrium endogenously de-

termines the R&D cost of intangible capital p. The R&D cost is not a price for a

trade. Instead, it is a cost that increases if all the other firms increase their spending

in R&D. This captures the intuition that developing new knowledge is harder if more

firms seek new knowledge. The rental rate for the tangible capital r is exogenously

given.

Definition 1. A collection of functions (kT , kI, q, M, MN , p, P, P N , x∗, xN ∗, Φex) is

an equilibrium if

1. (cid:0)x∗, xN ∗(cid:1) solves the household’s problem.

2. (kT (q, M), kI(q, M), q(M)) solves the listed firm’s problem.

3. The measure of listed firms choosing a transparency level q is consistent with

M(q) for all q ∈ [0, 1 − q].

4. The measure of non-listed firms is MN and satisfies

(cid:90) 1−q

0

M(q)dq + MN = 1.

5. R&D cost of intangible capital p is determined by the following equation:

K I =

(cid:90) 1

0

kI,idi.

6. Aggregate shared knowledge satisfies

Φex =

(cid:90) 1

0

1{i∈Listed} × kI,i(q + qi)di.

7. Financial market is cleared:

26

x∗(q)
P (q)

= M(q)

and

1
νN

xN ∗
P N = MN .

8. Indifference in the extensive-margin decision:

P (q) = P N , for ∀q ∈ [0, 1 − q].

With the endogenously determined distribution M of firms for each q, we can re-

write the market-clearing condition for intangible capital and the externality condition

using M. In the definition, each firm is aggregated along with index i ∈ [0, 1]. Instead,

we aggregate firms over the distribution of firms at each q. This aggregation is doable

since M is endogenously obtained, and kI is also a function of q and M. Therefore,

we re-write those two conditions in the following way:

K I =

(cid:90) 1−q

0

kI(q, M)M(q)dq,

Φex =

(cid:90) 1−q

0

kI(q, M)(q + q)M(q)dq.

Among all possible equilibrium, we are interested in the non-degenerate equilib-

rium where all the homogeneous firms use mixed strategies over the transparency

level q. The mixed strategy leads to the distribution of firms at each level of q. In

the equilibrium, this distribution needs to be consistent with the distribution that a

firm takes as a given state variable.

In the following section, we analytically characterize the equilibrium allocations

in this economy.

4.1 A listed firm’s decision

First, we solve a listed firm’s problem backward from the decision on the transparency

level and the other allocations. Then, we solve the firm’s decision on which financial

market to enter the public market of the private one.

27

Given a net funding intensity function, ϕL and the externality, Φex, a listed firm’s

problem is characterized as follows:

(cid:122)
(cid:20)

max
q

max
kT ,kI

Interim problem
(cid:125)(cid:124)
T (kI(1 − q − q))θ(Φex)γ − rkT − pkI

(cid:0)zkα

(cid:123)
(cid:21)
(cid:1) ϕL(q)

s.t. ϕL(q) =

ξ + ψ(q + q)
M(q)

.

From the optimality conditions of the interim problem, we can derive the relationship

among the transparency q, the regulation parameter q, and the intangible capital kI.

The relationship is formally stated in the following proposition:

Proposition 1. (Intangibles and the transparency)

Given α + θ < 1, kI(q, M; q) decreases in both q and q. Specifically,

kI(q, M; q) =

(cid:32)(cid:18) αz(Φex)γ

r

(cid:19) 1

1−α−θ (cid:18) rθ
pα

(cid:19) 1−α

1−α−θ

(cid:33)

(1 − q − q)

θ
1−α−θ .

Proof.

See Appendix D.

■

If a firm is in a state where the knowledge has to be transparently revealed to the

public, it naturally disincentivizes the firm to accumulate less knowledge. Therefore,

the marginal increase in voluntary or mandatory transparency leads to a marginal

decrease in the deployment of intangible capital stock. This result is consistent with

the empirical observation we document in the empirical analysis section.

Moreover, the incentive to reveal the information interacts with the importance

of the intangible in the production function, θ. When the intangible becomes more

important in production, the negative association between the intangible and trans-

parency strengthens. In other words, given the fixed intangible capital stock, a greater

θ is associated with a stronger incentive to conceal the information (lower q). Propo-

sition 2 theoretically shows this relationship.

28

Proposition 2 (Intangible share and the transparency).

Given α + θ < 1, the sensitivity of kI(q, M; q, θ) to the changes in q and q increases

in θ.

Proof.

See Appendix D.

■

Then, from the optimality condition with respect to the transparency, q, we can

characterize an ordinary differential equation (ODE) where the function of interest is

the net funding intensity function ϕ(q). The ODE is specified in Appendix D. Solving

the ODE, we characterize the transparency distribution M in the analytic form. We

state the analytic form of M in the following proposition:

Proposition 3. (Transparency distribution)

The unnormalized probability density function M of transparency q has the following

analytic form:

Proof.

See Appendix D.

M(q) = (ξ + ψ(q + q)) (1 − q − q)

θ
1−α−θ

1
ϕN .

■

In the multiplicative form of the closed-form endogenous distribution in Proposi-

tion 3, each component is directly interpretable.21

M(q) = (ξ + ψ(q + q))

(1 − q − q)

θ
1−α−θ

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
funding supply

(cid:125)

(cid:124)

(cid:123)(cid:122)
funding demand

(cid:125)

1
ϕN .
(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125)
eq. normalizer

The first component is the household’s preference for transparent firms. For a higher

q, the household is willing to provide greater funding to the firm. This behavior gen-

erates an incentive for a firm to choose high q. In contrast, the second term captures

21It is worth noting that the endogenous distribution is independent of the productivity level z.
Thus, the firm-level productivity heterogeneity does not matter in this setup. In the quantitative
analysis, we normalize the productivity z at 1.

29

firms’ incentive to reveal less information. This is consistent with the intuition that

a greater revelation only benefits competitors at the firm’s own cost. The third term

is the equilibrium object that balances the measure of listed and non-listed firms.

The following corollary establishes that the equilibrium distribution is unique for

the given support of the transparency [0, 1 − q].

Corollary 1. (Uniqueness of the transparency distribution)

Given the support [0, 1 − q], the equilibrium unnormalized probability density function

M is unique.

Proof. The result is immediate from the uniqueness of the ODE solution that satisfies

the boundary condition.

■

The probability density function M(q) belongs to a variant of a well-known class

of density functions: Beta distribution. In the following corollary, we prove that M(q)

follows a shifted truncated beta distribution and provide the closed-form characteri-

zation of the net funding intensity of the private firms, ϕN . For brevity of notation,

we define B := θ

1−α−θ .

Corollary 2. (Truncated normalized Beta distribution)

The gross transparency, y := q + q, follows a truncated normalized Beta distribution

where the shape parameters are B + 1 and 2, and the support is [q, 1].

q + q ∼

I{q ∈ [0, 1 − q]}
1 − MN

× Beta (B + 1, 2) ,

where B = θ

1−α−θ .

Proof.

See Appendix D.

■

It is worth noting that the probability density of q depends on the net funding

intensity of non-listed firms, ϕN . This net funding intensity is determined by the

30

following identity that requires the total measure of firms is unity:

1
ϕN

(cid:90) 1−q

0

(ξ + ψ(q + q))(1 − q − q)Bdq = 1 −

(cid:18) ξ

νN ϕN

(cid:19)

.

(1)

Equivalently, we can write down the identity in terms of the mass of non-listed firms

as follows:

ψ

νN
ξ

MN

(cid:90) 1−q

0

(cid:18) ξ
ψ

(cid:19)

+ (q + q)

(1 − q − q)Bdq = 1 − MN .

(2)

Therefore, we have the following closed-form solution for MN :

MN =

1

1 + ψ νN
ξ

(cid:82) 1−q
0

( ξ
ψ + (q + q))(1 − q − q)Bdq

.

(3)

Equation (3) is the fundamental component of the model, which captures how

the total measure of non-listed firms, MN , behaves when the policy parameter q

changes. Using Corollary 2, we can integrate out the M (q) in the right-hand side of

the equation in the following steps, using y = 1−q−q

1+ξ/ψ ∈ [0, 1−q

1+ξ/ψ ]:

MN =

1 + ψ νN

ξ (1 + ξ

1
ψ )B+2 (cid:82) 1−q

1+ξ/ψ
0

.

(1 − y)(y)Bdy

Then, we divide the numerator and the denominator by a beta function, B(B +1, 2).22

MN =

1/B(B + 1, 2) + ψ νN

ξ (1 + ξ

1/B(B + 1, 2)
ψ )B+2B(B + 1, 2) (cid:82) 1−q

1+ξ/ψ
0

.

yB(1 − y)dy

We integrate the denominator using the cumulative distribution function of beta

22The beta function is defined as follows:

B(a, b) :=

Γ(a)Γ(b)
Γ(a + b)

=

(a − 1)!(b − 1)!
(a + b − 1)!

=

(cid:90) 1

0

xa−1(1 − x)b−1dx.

31

distribution, F :

MN =

1/B(B + 1, 2) + ψ νN

1/B(B + 1, 2)
ξ (1 + ξ

ψ )B+2F

(cid:16) 1−q

1+ξ ; B + 1, 2

(cid:17).

By multiplying B(B + 1, 2) on the numerator and the denominator, we obtain the

following analytic form:

MN =

1

1 + ψ νN

ξ (1 + ξ

ψ )B+2B(B + 1, 2)F

(cid:16) 1−q

1+ξ ; B + 1, 2

(cid:17) .

(4)

Equation (4) characterizes the measure of private firms in the analytic form. Im-

portantly, the equation does not include either the price of the intangible or the

externality. That is, the measure of private firms is independently determined from

the general equilibrium effects and externality. The intuition behind this result is that

both the productivity shift through the externality and the general equilibrium effect

uniformly affect the operating profit of each firm, so they do not affect the decision

of how to finance their operating activities.23 Due to this separation, a measure of

private firm MN is determined directly by Equation (4). MN determines the funding

intensity of private firm ϕN . Then, from Proposition 3, the distribution of firms over

transparency is also independently determined from the general equilibrium effect

and the externality. Therefore, the mandated transparency q affects the firm-level

distribution directly through Equation (4) without any feedback effects in the gen-

eral equilibrium. Also, it is worth noting that Equation (4) theoretically predicts that

MN increases in q.

Proposition 4. (The relationship between the policy and the measure of listed firms)

MN strictly increases in q ∈ [0, 1].

Proof.

23For the same logic, the heterogeneous firm-level productivity does not affect the analytic form

in the current setup.

32

See Appendix D.

■

As the policymaker requires a stricte