SEC.gov | Bobby Peavler and William Eric Meek Skip to search field Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. SEC homepage Menu Close Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search Search Filings Search Filings Full Text Search Latest Filings Mutual Fund Search Variable Insurance Products Search SIC Codes CIK Lookup Public Dissemination Service (PDS) Search Assistance Submit Filings Submit Filings EDGAR Filer Management Portal EDGAR Filing Portal Online Forms Management Portal EDGAR Next Forms Index Filer Support &amp; Resources Data &amp; Research Data &amp; Research SEC &amp; Markets Data Taxonomies Statistics &amp; Data Visualizations Rules, Enforcement, &amp; Compliance Rules &amp; Regulations Rulemaking Activity Statutes &amp; Regulations Staff Guidance No-Action, Interpretive, and Exemptive Letters Self-Regulatory Organization Rulemaking Public Petitions for Rulemaking Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Compliance Examination Priorities Risk Alerts Compliance Outreach Program Proposed Rules What&#039;s New Whistleblower Program Featured Topics Featured Topics Crypto Task Force Cybersecurity Market Structure Analytics Saving and Investing for Military Personnel Saving and Investing for Teachers SEC-CFTC Harmonization Initiative Treasury Clearing Implementation About About Mission Commissioners Divisions &amp; Offices Division &amp; Office Directors Advisory Committees Budget &amp; Performance Reports &amp; Publications Commission Votes Contact the SEC Careers Submit a Tip or Complaint Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search More in this Section Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Home Enforcement and Litigation Litigation Releases Bobby Peavler and William Eric Meek Bobby Peavler and William Eric Meek U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Litigation Release No. 25690 / April 10, 2023 Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Release No. 4399 / April 10, 2023 Securities and Exchange Commission v. Bobby Peavler and William Eric Meek , No. 1:19-cv-04804 (S.D. Ind. filed Dec. 5, 2019) SEC Obtains Judgment After Executives Settle Case Alleging an Inflated Truck Pricing Scheme The Securities and Exchange Commission today announced the resolution of its accounting fraud action against former Celadon Group Inc. executives William Eric Meek and Bobby Peavler. Meek and Peavler agreed, without admitting or denying the allegations, to the entry of a final judgment that requires them to each pay a $50,000 civil penalty and bars them from acting as an officer or director of a public company for a period of three years. The SEC's complaint alleged that Meek, the former president and chief operating officer of Celadon Group, Inc., and Peavler, the former chief financial officer of Celadon Group Inc., participated in a scheme to buy and sell trucks at inflated prices, in some cases double or triple the trucks' fair market value. The complaint alleged these transactions were intended to conceal Celadon's failure to write down the trucks' net book values and take impairment charges. The complaint further alleged that as a result, Celadon overstated its pre-tax income, net income, and earnings per share in its annual report for the period ending June 30, 2016, and in its subsequent filings through the period ending December 31, 2016. Additionally, the complaint alleged Meek and Peavl