SEC.gov | Timothy J. Allcott, Thomas D. Renison, and ARO Equity, LLC Skip to search field Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. SEC homepage Menu Close Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search Search Filings Search Filings Full Text Search Latest Filings Mutual Fund Search Variable Insurance Products Search SIC Codes CIK Lookup Public Dissemination Service (PDS) Search Assistance Submit Filings Submit Filings EDGAR Filer Management Portal EDGAR Filing Portal Online Forms Management Portal EDGAR Next Forms Index Filer Support &amp; Resources Data &amp; Research Data &amp; Research SEC &amp; Markets Data Taxonomies Statistics &amp; Data Visualizations Rules, Enforcement, &amp; Compliance Rules &amp; Regulations Rulemaking Activity Statutes &amp; Regulations Staff Guidance No-Action, Interpretive, and Exemptive Letters Self-Regulatory Organization Rulemaking Public Petitions for Rulemaking Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Compliance Examination Priorities Risk Alerts Compliance Outreach Program Proposed Rules What&#039;s New Whistleblower Program Featured Topics Featured Topics Crypto Task Force Cybersecurity Market Structure Analytics Saving and Investing for Military Personnel Saving and Investing for Teachers SEC-CFTC Harmonization Initiative Treasury Clearing Implementation About About Mission Commissioners Divisions &amp; Offices Division &amp; Office Directors Advisory Committees Budget &amp; Performance Reports &amp; Publications Commission Votes Contact the SEC Careers Submit a Tip or Complaint Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search More in this Section Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Home Enforcement and Litigation Litigation Releases Timothy J. Allcott, Thomas D. Renison, and ARO Equity, LLC Timothy J. Allcott, Thomas D. Renison, and ARO Equity, LLC U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Litigation Release No. 25790 / July 28, 2023 Securities and Exchange Commission v. ARO Equity, LCC et al. , Civil Action No. 19-civ-10027 (D. Mass., filed January 8, 2020) SEC Obtains Judgments Against Principals of Investment Firm Charged with Fraudulently Misleading Investors The Securities and Exchange Commission has obtained final judgments in a previously-filed case against Thomas D. Renison and Timothy J. Allcott, whom the agency charged with making false statements to current and prospective retail investors about the performance of the investment firm they controlled, ARO Equity, LLC, and with using investor funds to pay interest to other investors. Among other things, the judgments order the defendants to pay a total of $12,348,181, with that amount deemed satisfied by orders of forfeiture and restitution in parallel criminal actions. According to the SEC's complaint filed in January 2020, in July 2014, Renison, a Connecticut resident, was barred by the SEC from, among other things, associating with any investment adviser or broker-dealer. Nevertheless, the complaint alleges that, from at least July 2015 through June 2018, Renison violated this bar when he, along with Allcott, a Massachusetts resident, formed ARO Equity as an investment adviser firm and raised approximately $6 million from at least 15 investors. The SEC's complaint alleges that Renison and Allcott falsely touted ARO Equity's success to encourage potential investors to cash out of 