SEC.gov | Sam A. Antar Skip to search field Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. SEC homepage Menu Close Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search Search Filings Search Filings Full Text Search Latest Filings Mutual Fund Search Variable Insurance Products Search SIC Codes CIK Lookup Public Dissemination Service (PDS) Search Assistance Submit Filings Submit Filings EDGAR Filer Management Portal EDGAR Filing Portal Online Forms Management Portal EDGAR Next Forms Index Filer Support &amp; Resources Data &amp; Research Data &amp; Research SEC &amp; Markets Data Taxonomies Statistics &amp; Data Visualizations Rules, Enforcement, &amp; Compliance Rules &amp; Regulations Rulemaking Activity Statutes &amp; Regulations Staff Guidance No-Action, Interpretive, and Exemptive Letters Self-Regulatory Organization Rulemaking Public Petitions for Rulemaking Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Compliance Examination Priorities Risk Alerts Compliance Outreach Program Proposed Rules What&#039;s New Whistleblower Program Featured Topics Featured Topics Crypto Task Force Cybersecurity Market Structure Analytics Saving and Investing for Military Personnel Saving and Investing for Teachers SEC-CFTC Harmonization Initiative Treasury Clearing Implementation About About Mission Commissioners Divisions &amp; Offices Division &amp; Office Directors Advisory Committees Budget &amp; Performance Reports &amp; Publications Commission Votes Contact the SEC Careers Submit a Tip or Complaint Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search More in this Section Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Home Enforcement and Litigation Litigation Releases Sam A. Antar Sam A. Antar U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Litigation Release No. 25730 / May 19, 2023 Securities and Exchange Commission v. Sam A. Antar, No. 1:19-cv-11527 (S.D.N.Y. filed December 17, 2019) SEC Obtains Final Judgment Against Individual Who Defrauded New Jersey Investors On May 17, 2023, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York entered a final consent judgment against Sam A. Antar, who the SEC previously charged with defrauding investors, many of whom were his friends and acquaintances in a Syrian Jewish community in New Jersey. The SEC's s complaint , alleged that Antar, of New York, New York, engaged in a fraudulent scheme that deceived numerous investors out of more than $550,000 while claiming he would invest in shares of companies that were not yet public, and then sell those shares to already-identified buyers for a premium in a short period of time. In reality, according to the complaint, Antar never used investor funds to purchase shares of emerging companies, or to make any other investment. Instead, Antar spent investor funds gambling, making gifts to family members, paying for his daughter's wedding, and making Ponzi-like payments to some early investors. The final judgment permanently enjoins Antar from violating the antifraud provisions of the federal securities laws, Section 17(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Rule 10b-5 thereunder. The judgment also orders Antar to pay disgorgement of $567,000 and prejudgment interest of $88,754, with offsets permitted for amounts Antar pays pursuant to a restitution order in a parallel criminal action. 