SEC.gov | Robert Donald Bruce Genovese, et al. Skip to search field Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. SEC homepage Menu Close Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search Search Filings Search Filings Full Text Search Latest Filings Mutual Fund Search Variable Insurance Products Search SIC Codes CIK Lookup Public Dissemination Service (PDS) Search Assistance Submit Filings Submit Filings EDGAR Filer Management Portal EDGAR Filing Portal Online Forms Management Portal EDGAR Next Forms Index Filer Support &amp; Resources Data &amp; Research Data &amp; Research SEC &amp; Markets Data Taxonomies Statistics &amp; Data Visualizations Rules, Enforcement, &amp; Compliance Rules &amp; Regulations Rulemaking Activity Statutes &amp; Regulations Staff Guidance No-Action, Interpretive, and Exemptive Letters Self-Regulatory Organization Rulemaking Public Petitions for Rulemaking Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Compliance Examination Priorities Risk Alerts Compliance Outreach Program Proposed Rules What&#039;s New Whistleblower Program Featured Topics Featured Topics Crypto Task Force Cybersecurity Market Structure Analytics Saving and Investing for Military Personnel Saving and Investing for Teachers SEC-CFTC Harmonization Initiative Treasury Clearing Implementation About About Mission Commissioners Divisions &amp; Offices Division &amp; Office Directors Advisory Committees Budget &amp; Performance Reports &amp; Publications Commission Votes Contact the SEC Careers Submit a Tip or Complaint Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search More in this Section Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Home Enforcement and Litigation Litigation Releases Robert Donald Bruce Genovese, et al. Robert Donald Bruce Genovese, et al. --> SEC Obtains Final Judgment Against Former Head of Investment Banking At Defunct Broker-Dealer Litigation Release No. 25620 / January 20, 2023 Securities and Exchange Commission v. Robert Donald Bruce Genovese, et al. , No. 17-cv-5821 (S.D.N.Y. filed August 1, 2017) On January 20, 2023, the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York entered a final consent judgment against Abraham "Avi" Mirman, the former head of investment banking at now-defunct New York broker-dealer John Thomas Financial, Inc. (JTF). The SEC charged Mirman and another defendant in 2017 with involvement in a scheme concerning Liberty Silver Corp., a penny stock, in which Mirman aided and abetted others to artificially inflate Liberty Silver's stock price while failing to disclose the sale of 6.6 million Liberty Silver shares to JTF's retail customers, and substantially participated in non-exempt unregistered offerings of additional Liberty Silver shares. Without admitting or denying the SEC's allegations, Mirman consented to the entry of a final judgment that enjoins him from future violations of Sections 5(a), 5(c) and 17(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933, and imposes a three year penny stock bar pursuant to Securities Act Section 20(g). The judgment further orders Mirman to pay disgorgement in the amount of $278,519.45, plus prejudgment interest of $127,006.15, and a civil penalty of $125,000. The litigation was conducted by Jack Kaufman, Nancy A. Brown, and Derek M. Schoenmann, and supervised by Thomas P. Smith, Jr. SEC Complaint Resources SEC Complaint Return