SEC.gov | SAExploration Holdings, Inc., et al. Skip to search field Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. SEC homepage Menu Close Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search Search Filings Search Filings Full Text Search Latest Filings Mutual Fund Search Variable Insurance Products Search SIC Codes CIK Lookup Public Dissemination Service (PDS) Search Assistance Submit Filings Submit Filings EDGAR Filer Management Portal EDGAR Filing Portal Online Forms Management Portal EDGAR Next Forms Index Filer Support &amp; Resources Data &amp; Research Data &amp; Research SEC &amp; Markets Data Taxonomies Statistics &amp; Data Visualizations Rules, Enforcement, &amp; Compliance Rules &amp; Regulations Rulemaking Activity Statutes &amp; Regulations Staff Guidance No-Action, Interpretive, and Exemptive Letters Self-Regulatory Organization Rulemaking Public Petitions for Rulemaking Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Compliance Examination Priorities Risk Alerts Compliance Outreach Program Proposed Rules What&#039;s New Whistleblower Program Featured Topics Featured Topics Crypto Task Force Cybersecurity Market Structure Analytics Saving and Investing for Military Personnel Saving and Investing for Teachers SEC-CFTC Harmonization Initiative Treasury Clearing Implementation About About Mission Commissioners Divisions &amp; Offices Division &amp; Office Directors Advisory Committees Budget &amp; Performance Reports &amp; Publications Commission Votes Contact the SEC Careers Submit a Tip or Complaint Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search More in this Section Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Home Enforcement and Litigation Litigation Releases SAExploration Holdings, Inc., et al. SAExploration Holdings, Inc., et al. U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Litigation Release No. 25700 / April 25, 2023 Accounting and Auditing Enforcement No. 4402 / April 25, 2023 Securities and Exchange Commission v. SAExploration Holdings, Inc., et al. , No. 1:20-CV-08423 (S.D.N.Y. filed Oct. 8, 2020) SEC Obtains Final Judgment from Former Executive for His Role in $100 Million Accounting Fraud On April 21, 2023, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York entered final judgment against Jeffrey Hastings for his role in a multi-year accounting fraud engaged in while he was CEO of Houston-based seismic data company SAExploration Holdings, Inc. (SAE). The SEC's amended complaint alleges that Hastings and three other former SAE executives falsely inflated the revenue of SAE by approximately $100 million and concealed their theft of millions of dollars from the company. According to the SEC's amended complaint, Hastings, along with his co-defendants, caused SAE to enter into a series of seismic data acquisition contracts totaling approximately $140 million with a purportedly unrelated Alaska-based company that was in fact controlled by Hastings and co-defendant Brent Whiteley. The amended complaint alleges that SAE improperly recorded approximately $100 million in revenue in light of the Alaskan company's inability to pay and the SAE executives' control of the company. As also alleged, Hastings and his co-defendants misappropriated $12 million from SAE and routed approximately half of those funds back to SAE to create the false impression that the related Alaskan company was a