SEC.gov | Mahmoud Ali Abdelkader Skip to search field Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. SEC homepage Menu Close Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search Search Filings Search Filings Full Text Search Latest Filings Mutual Fund Search Variable Insurance Products Search SIC Codes CIK Lookup Public Dissemination Service (PDS) Search Assistance Submit Filings Submit Filings EDGAR Filer Management Portal EDGAR Filing Portal Online Forms Management Portal EDGAR Next Forms Index Filer Support &amp; Resources Data &amp; Research Data &amp; Research SEC &amp; Markets Data Taxonomies Statistics &amp; Data Visualizations Rules, Enforcement, &amp; Compliance Rules &amp; Regulations Rulemaking Activity Statutes &amp; Regulations Staff Guidance No-Action, Interpretive, and Exemptive Letters Self-Regulatory Organization Rulemaking Public Petitions for Rulemaking Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Compliance Examination Priorities Risk Alerts Compliance Outreach Program Proposed Rules What&#039;s New Whistleblower Program Featured Topics Featured Topics Crypto Task Force Cybersecurity Market Structure Analytics Saving and Investing for Military Personnel Saving and Investing for Teachers SEC-CFTC Harmonization Initiative Treasury Clearing Implementation About About Mission Commissioners Divisions &amp; Offices Division &amp; Office Directors Advisory Committees Budget &amp; Performance Reports &amp; Publications Commission Votes Contact the SEC Careers Submit a Tip or Complaint Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search More in this Section Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Home Enforcement and Litigation Litigation Releases Mahmoud Ali Abdelkader Mahmoud Ali Abdelkader --> SEC Settles Insider Trading Charges Against Spouse of Corporate Insider Litigation Release No. 25660 / March 9, 2023 Securities and Exchange Commission v. Mahmoud Ali Abdelkader , No. 3:23-cv-01032 (N.D. Cal. filed Mar. 7, 2023) The Securities and Exchange Commission announced today that California resident Mahmoud Abdelkader has agreed to settle charges for insider trading in the securities of Audentes Therapeutics, Inc. before the December 2, 2019 public announcement that Audentes would be acquired by Astellas Pharma, Inc. for approximately $3 billion. According to the SEC's complaint, Abdelkader's wife worked for Audentes. The SEC alleges that Abdelkader determined, based on facts he learned from his wife, that there was a high likelihood of Audentes being acquired. Using this material nonpublic information he misappropriated from his wife, Abdelkader allegedly purchased short-term, out-of-the money Audentes call options on October 17 and October 18, 2019. The SEC further alleges that when Audentes' stock price rose by approximately 106% following the acquisition announcement, Abdelkader obtained ill-gotten gains of approximately $81,580. Abdelkader consented to the entry of a final judgment that would resolve all claims and permanently enjoin him from violating Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Rule 10b-5 thereunder. Abdelkader agreed to pay a civil money penalty of $81,580 and to disgorge his profits with prejudgment interest totaling $90,570. The settlement is subject to court approval. The SEC's investigation was conducted by Jason Schall, Lauren Poper and Wendy Kong.