SEC.gov | John D. Fierro and JDF Capital, Inc. Skip to search field Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. SEC homepage Menu Close Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search Search Filings Search Filings Full Text Search Latest Filings Mutual Fund Search Variable Insurance Products Search SIC Codes CIK Lookup Public Dissemination Service (PDS) Search Assistance Submit Filings Submit Filings EDGAR Filer Management Portal EDGAR Filing Portal Online Forms Management Portal EDGAR Next Forms Index Filer Support &amp; Resources Data &amp; Research Data &amp; Research SEC &amp; Markets Data Taxonomies Statistics &amp; Data Visualizations Rules, Enforcement, &amp; Compliance Rules &amp; Regulations Rulemaking Activity Statutes &amp; Regulations Staff Guidance No-Action, Interpretive, and Exemptive Letters Self-Regulatory Organization Rulemaking Public Petitions for Rulemaking Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Compliance Examination Priorities Risk Alerts Compliance Outreach Program Proposed Rules What&#039;s New Whistleblower Program Featured Topics Featured Topics Crypto Task Force Cybersecurity Market Structure Analytics Saving and Investing for Military Personnel Saving and Investing for Teachers SEC-CFTC Harmonization Initiative Treasury Clearing Implementation About About Mission Commissioners Divisions &amp; Offices Division &amp; Office Directors Advisory Committees Budget &amp; Performance Reports &amp; Publications Commission Votes Contact the SEC Careers Submit a Tip or Complaint Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search More in this Section Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Home Enforcement and Litigation Litigation Releases John D. Fierro and JDF Capital, Inc. John D. Fierro and JDF Capital, Inc. U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Litigation Release No. 26010 / May 23, 2024 Securities and Exchange Commission v. John D. Fierro and JDF Capital, Inc. , No. 3:20-cv-02104 (GC) (JBD) (D. N.J. May 21, 2024) SEC Obtains $5.9 Million Judgment Against Unregistered Penny Stock Dealer On May 21, 2024, Judge Georgette Castner of the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey entered a final judgment against John D. Fierro and JDF Capital, Inc. The SEC's complaint alleged that the Defendants failed to register as securities dealers with the SEC, or to associate with a registered dealer, when they bought and sold billions of newly issued shares of penny stock from at least January 2015 through November 2017. The Defendants obtained the shares directly from issuers after converting debt securities known as convertible notes. By failing to register, Defendants avoided certain regulatory obligations&nbsp;for dealers&nbsp;that govern their conduct in the marketplace, including regulatory inspections and oversight, financial responsibility requirements, and maintaining books and records. The court previously granted summary judgment to the Commission. On June 29, 2023, the court found that Fierro and JDF Capital engaged in a regular business of buying and selling securities for their own account, and that their failure to register as dealers violated the dealer registration requirements of Section 15(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. In its final judgment, the court ordered Fierro and JDF Capital to pay on a joint-and-several basis disgorgem