SEC.gov | Knox et al. Skip to search field Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. SEC homepage Menu Close Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search Search Filings Search Filings Full Text Search Latest Filings Mutual Fund Search Variable Insurance Products Search SIC Codes CIK Lookup Public Dissemination Service (PDS) Search Assistance Submit Filings Submit Filings EDGAR Filer Management Portal EDGAR Filing Portal Online Forms Management Portal EDGAR Next Forms Index Filer Support &amp; Resources Data &amp; Research Data &amp; Research SEC &amp; Markets Data Taxonomies Statistics &amp; Data Visualizations Rules, Enforcement, &amp; Compliance Rules &amp; Regulations Rulemaking Activity Statutes &amp; Regulations Staff Guidance No-Action, Interpretive, and Exemptive Letters Self-Regulatory Organization Rulemaking Public Petitions for Rulemaking Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Compliance Examination Priorities Risk Alerts Compliance Outreach Program Proposed Rules What&#039;s New Whistleblower Program Featured Topics Featured Topics Crypto Task Force Cybersecurity Market Structure Analytics Saving and Investing for Military Personnel Saving and Investing for Teachers SEC-CFTC Harmonization Initiative Treasury Clearing Implementation About About Mission Commissioners Divisions &amp; Offices Division &amp; Office Directors Advisory Committees Budget &amp; Performance Reports &amp; Publications Commission Votes Contact the SEC Careers Submit a Tip or Complaint Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search More in this Section Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Home Enforcement and Litigation Litigation Releases Knox et al. Knox et al. --> SEC Obtains Final Judgments Against Individual and Entity in Multi-Million Dollar International Fraud Scheme Litigation Release No. 25600 / December 21, 2022 Securities and Exchange Commission v. Knox et al. , Civil Action No. 1:18-cv-12058 (D. Mass. filed Oct. 2, 2018) The Securities and Exchange Commission announced that it obtained final judgments against Roger Knox and an entity he controlled for their role in an international scheme that generated more than $165 million of illegal sales of stock on the U.S. markets in at least 50 microcap companies. The final judgments impose multiple injunctions against Knox and his entity Wintercap SA and find them liable for over $6 million in disgorgement and prejudgment interest. According to the SEC's complaint filed in October 2018, Knox and Wintercap helped microcap securities holders evade federal securities laws that restrict sales by large shareholders. The complaint charged that Knox and Wintercap helped sellers conceal their stock ownership and provided anonymous access to brokerage accounts to sell the shares on the U.S. markets. In a parallel criminal action brought by the U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of Massachusetts, a federal grand jury in Massachusetts indicted Knox on one count of securities fraud and one count of conspiracy to commit securities fraud. Knox pled guilty in January 2020. His sentencing remains pending. The SEC's complaint also charged Michael Gastauer for aiding and abetting the fraud by establishing several U.S. corporations and allowing Knox to use their bank accounts to disburse the proceeds of his illegal stock sales. The complaint named as r