SEC.gov | Profile Solutions, Inc. et. al. Skip to search field Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock A locked padlock ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. SEC homepage Menu Close Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search Search Filings Search Filings Full Text Search Latest Filings Mutual Fund Search Variable Insurance Products Search SIC Codes CIK Lookup Public Dissemination Service (PDS) Search Assistance Submit Filings Submit Filings EDGAR Filer Management Portal EDGAR Filing Portal Online Forms Management Portal EDGAR Next Forms Index Filer Support &amp; Resources Data &amp; Research Data &amp; Research SEC &amp; Markets Data Taxonomies Statistics &amp; Data Visualizations Rules, Enforcement, &amp; Compliance Rules &amp; Regulations Rulemaking Activity Statutes &amp; Regulations Staff Guidance No-Action, Interpretive, and Exemptive Letters Self-Regulatory Organization Rulemaking Public Petitions for Rulemaking Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Compliance Examination Priorities Risk Alerts Compliance Outreach Program Proposed Rules What&#039;s New Whistleblower Program Featured Topics Featured Topics Crypto Task Force Cybersecurity Market Structure Analytics Saving and Investing for Military Personnel Saving and Investing for Teachers SEC-CFTC Harmonization Initiative Treasury Clearing Implementation About About Mission Commissioners Divisions &amp; Offices Division &amp; Office Directors Advisory Committees Budget &amp; Performance Reports &amp; Publications Commission Votes Contact the SEC Careers Submit a Tip or Complaint Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Newsroom | Investors Small Businesses Whistleblowers Search SEC.gov &amp; EDGAR Search More in this Section Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Enforcement &amp; Litigation Litigation Releases Administrative Proceedings Administrative Law Judge Orders and Initial Decisions Trading Suspensions Distributions to Harmed Investors Receiverships Electronic Filings in Administrative Proceedings (eFAP) Rules of Practice Applications for Reentry Reports of Investigations Whistleblower Program Public Alert: Unregistered Soliciting Entities (PAUSE) SEC Action Lookup - Individuals (SALI) Enforcement Data Delivery Standards Small Businesses Appellate Briefs Amicus / Friend of the Court Briefs Home Enforcement and Litigation Litigation Releases Profile Solutions, Inc. et. al. Profile Solutions, Inc. et. al. --> SEC Charges Florida Company and Its Officers with Fraud Litigation Release No. 25500 / September 9, 2022 Securities and Exchange Commission v. Profile Solutions, Inc. et. al. , 1:22-cv-22881 (S.D. Fla filed September 9, 2022) The Securities and Exchange Commission today charged Profile Solutions, Inc., a purported cannabinoid and hemp manufacturing company, its CEO Dan Oran, and alleged undisclosed executive officer Leonard M. Tucker with fraud for making alleged material misrepresentations and omissions to the investing public. According to the SEC's complaint, filed in federal district court in the Southern District of Florida, between October 2018 and March 2019, Profile Solutions, through Oran and Tucker, made material misrepresentations and omissions to investors in a series of press releases, postings on Twitter, and Form S-1 registration statements filed with the Commission, which had not been declared effective. As alleged, the press releases falsely claimed that Profile Solutions had obtained "preliminary approval" to grow and process medical cannabis and hemp in The Kingdom of Eswatini, omitted to disclose that growing cannabis in that country was illegal, and made material misstatements regarding distribution rights granted to a third party company to sell Profile Solution's products. In addition, the complaint alleges Profile Solution's amended registration statement included the same misstatements regarding the purported Eswatini deal. The complaint further alleges that Profile Solution's registration statement and amended registration statement failed to di