TITLE: Tenofovir Alafenamide Fumarate Reduces Virological Replication in HBeAg‐Negative Patients With Normal Alanine Aminotransferase: A 48‐Week Randomised Controlled Trial


ABSTRACT:
ABSTRACT The optimal strategy for chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infected patients with negative hepatitis B e‐antigen (HBeAg) and normal alanine aminotransferase (ALT) remains uncertain. This study aimed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of tenofovir alafenamide fumarate (TAF) treatment in this patient population. This prospective, open‐label, randomised controlled trial enrolled HBeAg‐negative patients with normal ALT and randomised them 1:1 to either the treatment group (TAF) or the control group (no treatment). The primary endpoint was the reduction in hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) levels from baseline to week 48. A total of 62 patients were enrolled and followed up by 48 weeks ( n  = 31 per group). No serious adverse events were reported. At week 48, there was no significant difference in the change in HBsAg between the treatment and control groups [0.01 (−0.06, 0.05) vs. −0.05 (−0.12, 0.06) log 10  IU/mL,  p  = 0.354]. However, HBV DNA levels were significantly lower in the treatment group (0 vs. 2.86 log 10  IU/mL,  p  < 0.001). All patients achieved HBV DNA below 20 IU/mL after treatment. Additionally, chitinase‐3‐like protein 1 level was lower in the treatment group (23.8 vs. 44.8 ng/mL,  p  = 0.019). TAF was well‐tolerated in HBeAg‐negative patients with normal ALT and low‐level HBV DNA viremia. Treatment for 48 weeks led to a high rate of HBV DNA suppression and may potentially delay liver fibrosis progression. Accordingly, early antiviral treatment may benefit this patient population. 
 Trial Registration:  Clinical trial number:  NCT 04231565


METHODS:
This was a single‐centre, prospective, open‐label, randomised, controlled study. Chronic HBV‐infected patients with negative HBeAg, HBV DNA levels between 20 and 2000 IU/mL and normal ALT levels admitted to the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat‐sen University between June 2020 and August 2023 were included. Eligible patients were randomly assigned to either a treatment group (TAF) or a control group (blank) in a 1:1 ratio. Randomisation was performed using a computer‐generated random number sequence concealed in sealed envelopes. Investigators sequentially selected envelopes and opened them to reveal the treatment allocation for each participant. Detailed inclusion criteria  were as follows: (1) HBsAg positivity for more than 6 months; (2) HBV DNA between 20 and 2000 IU/mL; (3) ALT levels ≤ 1 × upper limit of normal (ULN) (35 U/L); (4) age between 18 and 65 years; (5) no prior antiviral treatment within the past year; and (6) liver stiffness measurement (LSM) < 5.8 kPa to exclude advanced fibrosis.  Exclusion criteria  included: (1) use of immunosuppressants; (2) pregnancy or breastfeeding; (3) superinfection with other viral hepatitis; (4) liver cirrhosis or HCC; (5) liver diseases of other etiologies, including autoimmune liver disease, toxic or drug‐induced liver injury, alcoholic liver disease and genetic metabolic liver diseases; (6) HIV infection or other immunodeficiency disorders; (7) diabetes, renal dysfunction, autoimmune diseases, or other organ dysfunctions; (8) family history of liver cirrhosis or HCC. Patients in the treatment group received oral TAF 25 mg daily with food. The control group received no active treatment but underwent routine follow‐up. If ALT levels exceeded 1 × ULN and HBV DNA remained positive during follow‐up, treatment with 25 mg of TAF daily was recommended, as illustrated in Figure  S1 . The study protocol has been previously published [ 8 ]. All subjects underwent baseline screening and were followed up with a consultation every 12 weeks post‐enrollment until the study's completion. At each follow‐up visit, patients were queried about symptoms, including fatigue, anorexia, nausea and any comorbidities. Additionally, medication adherence was confirmed. Complete blood count, biochemical parameters and serum virological markers (HBV DNA, HBsAg) were reassessed. HBV pgRNA, chitinase 3‐like protein 1 (CHI3L1), LSM and abdominal ultrasound were evaluated at baseline and every 24 weeks post‐study initiation. Serum HBV DNA was quantified using a qPCR internal standard method (Abbott) with a lower limit of detection of 10 IU/mL. HBsAg was measured using a quantitative detection kit (Roche) with a detection range of 0.05–52,000 IU/mL. HBeAg was detected using enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay kits. HBV pgRNA (Supbio) was detected using a PCR fluorescent probe assay with a detection range of 15–1 × 10 8  copies/mL. Results above the upper limit of detection were reported as such. The CHI3L1 level (Fibro‐CHI kit, Proprium) was measured using a chemiluminescence method and liver fibrosis was considered significant when the CHI3L1 concentration was ≥ 79 ng/mL. LSM was assessed using FibroScan. The primary endpoint was a significant difference in the magnitude of change in HBsAg levels between the treatment and control groups from baseline to 48 weeks. Secondary endpoints included the virological response rate (defined as HBV DNA < 20 IU/mL), changes in HBV DNA and HBV pgRNA levels from baseline and the HBsAg loss rate (defined as HBsAg < 0.05 IU/mL). Safety evaluations included the occurrence of adverse events and the incidence of dyslipidemia and ALT elevations exceeding 1 × ULN. Given the limited number of previous studies on TAF treatment for HBV‐infected patients with normal ALT levels, sample size estimation relied on TAF treatment data for CHB patients. According to the literature, a 24 week treatment regimen of Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate combined with pegylated interferon α resulted in a 0.91 log 10  IU/mL reduction in HBsAg for patients with mild ALT elevation [ 9 ]. Another study demonstrated a 0.22 log 10  IU/mL decrease in HBsAg over a median 5‐year follow‐up period in untreated HBV patients [ 10 ]. Using Power Analysis & Sample Size software, we estimated the sample sizes of the treatment and control groups to achieve 80% power (two‐sided test,  α  = 0.05) to detect a significant intergroup difference in HBsAg reduction from baseline. Accounting for a 20% dropout rate, 45 patients were required in each group, resulting in a total sample size of 90 patients. According to the intention‐to‐treat principle, all patients who were randomised to treatment groups, received at least one dose of the study medication or had at least one follow‐up data point were included in the full analysis set (FAS) for efficacy and safety analyses. The primary efficacy indicators were also analysed based on the per‐protocol (PP) set, which included only those patients in the FAS who adhered strictly to the protocol. Continuous variables were compared between the two groups using Student's  t ‐test for normally distributed data or the Mann–Whitney  U  test for non‐normally distributed data. Data were presented as mean (standard deviation) or median (interquartile range). Categorical variables were compared between the two groups using Pearson's chi‐squared test or Fisher's exact test and data are presented as  n  (%). Correlations were assessed using Spearman's linear regression analysis. All tests were two‐tailed, and statistical significance was defined as a  p ‐value less than 0.05. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 23.0 software. The plot for correlations was generated using R software (v.4.2.2) package ggplot2 (v.3.4.2) through Hiplot Pro ( https://hiplot.com.cn/ ), a comprehensive web service for biomedical data analysis and visualisation. Patients with missing primary outcome measures (including HBsAg and HBV DNA) were excluded from the analysis. For other variables with less than 20% missing data, missing values were imputed using the average of the two nearest observed values for the same patient. This study was conducted in accordance with the ethical principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki (revised 1975) and the Istanbul Convention. The study protocol received approval from the Medical Ethics Committee of the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat‐sen University (approval number [2019] 02‐599‐01). All participants provided written informed consent using a form approved by the Medical Ethics Committee prior to enrollment. The study was prospectively registered on  ClinicalTrials.gov  ( NCT 04231565 ).


LABORATORY METHODS:
Serum HBV DNA was quantified using a qPCR internal standard method (Abbott) with a lower limit of detection of 10 IU/mL. HBsAg was measured using a quantitative detection kit (Roche) with a detection range of 0.05–52,000 IU/mL. HBeAg was detected using enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay kits. HBV pgRNA (Supbio) was detected using a PCR fluorescent probe assay with a detection range of 15–1 × 10 8  copies/mL. Results above the upper limit of detection were reported as such. The CHI3L1 level (Fibro‐CHI kit, Proprium) was measured using a chemiluminescence method and liver fibrosis was considered significant when the CHI3L1 concentration was ≥ 79 ng/mL. LSM was assessed using FibroScan.


OUTCOMES:
The primary endpoint was a significant difference in the magnitude of change in HBsAg levels between the treatment and control groups from baseline to 48 weeks. Secondary endpoints included the virological response rate (defined as HBV DNA < 20 IU/mL), changes in HBV DNA and HBV pgRNA levels from baseline and the HBsAg loss rate (defined as HBsAg < 0.05 IU/mL). Safety evaluations included the occurrence of adverse events and the incidence of dyslipidemia and ALT elevations exceeding 1 × ULN.


RESULTS:
From June 4, 2020 to August 5, 2023, a total of 62 eligible HBeAg‐negative patients were randomly assigned to the TAF group ( n  = 31) and the control group ( n  = 31) and had completed 48 weeks of follow‐up (FAS), as illustrated in Figure  1 . One patient in the control group withdrew due to pregnancy, and 6 patients (9.7%) were lost to follow‐up, resulting in missing 48 week data. Ultimately, 55 patients were included in the PP analysis set. Patient recruitment for this study is ongoing. Flowchart of study subjects.  @ According to the intention‐to‐treat (ITT) principle, sixty‐two patients were classified into full analysis set (FAS) to evaluate efficacy and safety.  # fifty‐five patients were classified into per protocol analysis set (PPS) to evaluate efficacy. The mean age of participants in the TAF group was higher than that in the control group (36.0 ± 6.6 vs. 32.6 ± 5.2 years,  p  = 0.026). No other significant differences in baseline characteristics were observed between the two groups (Table  1 ). Baseline characteristics of patients (FAS). Note:  Data are expressed as Mean ± SD, Median (IQR), or  n  (%). The red highlighting indicates the items with statistically significant  p ‐values ( p  < 0.05). 20 and 22 patients underwent CHI3L1 testing in TAF and Control groups, respectively. Only one patient in the TAF group experienced mild nausea during treatment, which resolved spontaneously. At week 12, one patient in the TAF group and one in the control group presented with elevated creatine kinase (CK) levels (4436 U/L and 1451 U/L, respectively) and muscle pain following intense physical activity within 3 days prior. The patient in the TAF group did not interrupt treatment, and symptoms resolved with 1 week of rest, with CK levels returning to below 500 U/L. No further CK elevations were observed in either patient during subsequent follow‐up. No patient discontinued treatment due to severe adverse events during the study. No cases of cirrhosis or HCC occurred. At week 48, 5 patients (17.2%) in the TAF group and 3 patients (11.5%) in the control group exhibited ultrasound findings suggestive of fatty liver ( p  = 0.829). There was no significant difference in the incidence of ALT elevations exceeding 1 × ULN within 48 weeks between the TAF group (19.4%,  n  = 6) and the control group (16.1%,  n  = 5),  p  = 0.74. All ALT elevations were mild (< 2 × ULN). At week 48, the TAF group exhibited slightly lower serum phosphorus levels than the control group, although both groups remained within the normal range. No significant differences were observed between the two groups in other biochemical parameters, including blood lipids (Table  2 ). Biochemical parameters at week‐48. Note:  Δ, changes in CHOL, TG, LDL‐C and HDL‐C from baseline to week 48. The red highlighting indicates the items with statistically significant  p ‐values ( p  < 0.05). Based on the FAS, there were no significant differences in HBsAg levels between the two groups at 12, 24 and 48 weeks and no significant difference in the change in HBsAg from baseline (see Figure  2  and Table  3 ). At week 48, the TAF group exhibited a 0.01 log 10  IU/mL increase in HBsAg from baseline (−0.06, 0.05), while the control group demonstrated a 0.05 log 10  IU/mL decrease from baseline (−0.12, 0.06),  p  = 0.354. The results from the PP analysis were consistent with those from the FAS (see Table  S1 ). No patient in either group achieved HBsAg loss at 48 weeks. Virological and serological dynamics during follow‐up in both groups. (A–C) Dynamics of HBV DNA, HBV pgRNA and HBsAg values in both groups. (D–F) Changes from baseline in HBV DNA, HBV pgRNA and HBsAg in both groups. The figures show the median and IQR. Virological and serological parameters in both groups during follow‐up. Note:  Δ, changes from baseline. The red highlighting indicates the items with statistically significant  p ‐values ( p  < 0.05). Based on the FAS analysis (see Figure  2  and Table  3 ), from weeks 12 to 48, HBV DNA loads were significantly lower in the TAF group compared to the control group, and the change in HBV DNA from baseline at 48 weeks was also more significant in the TAF group [−2.81 (−3.15, −2.37) vs. 0.16 (−0.09, 0.49) log 10  IU/mL,  p  < 0.001]. The PP analysis yielded results consistent with the FAS (see Table  S1 ). After 48 weeks of treatment, the virological response rate in the TAF group was 100%, while none of the patients in the control group achieved spontaneous HBV DNA suppression below 20 IU/mL by week 48. Analysis of the FAS showed no significant difference in HBV pgRNA levels between the two groups at 24 and 48 weeks. However, at week 24, the TAF group demonstrated a more significant reduction in HBV pgRNA from baseline compared to the control group [0 (−1.30, 0) vs. 0 (0, 1.24) log 10  copies/mL,  p  = 0.027]. This difference was no longer evident at week 48 ( p  = 0.140), as shown in Figure  2  and Table  3 . At week 48, the proportion of HBV pgRNA‐negative patients was 51.9% in the TAF group and 42.3% in the control group ( p  = 0.487). The PPS analysis showed no significant differences in HBV pgRNA levels or the change from baseline between the two groups (see Table  S1 ). Correlation analyses between different variables at week 48 were performed. In both the TAF and control groups, no significant correlations were observed between HBV pgRNA and levels of HBV DNA, HBsAg, or ALT. Further analysis revealed a significant positive correlation between the change in HBV pgRNA (from baseline to week 48) and the change in HBV DNA in the TAF group ( r  = 0.42,  p  = 0.03). Additionally, the change in HBV pgRNA was also significantly correlated with baseline HBV DNA and HBV pgRNA levels, with correlation coefficients of −0.51 ( p  = 0.006) and −0.41 ( p  = 0.03), respectively (Figure  3 ). However, in the TAF group, neither HBsAg nor Δ HBsAg at week 48 showed significant correlations with HBV DNA, HBV pgRNA, ALT at week 48, or their respective baseline levels. Correlation of 48‐week Δ HBV pgRNA with other variables. (A, B) Δ HBV pgRNA with Δ HBV DNA and Δ HBsAg in TAF group. (C–E) Δ HBV pgRNA with HBV DNA, HBV pgRNA and HBsAg at baseline in TAF group. (F, G) Δ HBV pgRNA with Δ HBV DNA and Δ HBsAg in Control group. (H–J) Δ HBV pgRNA with HBV DNA, HBV pgRNA and HBsAg at baseline in Control group. At week 48, the mean LSM values were similar in both groups, 4.5 ± 0.7 kPa in the TAF group and 4.5 ± 0.8 kPa in the Control group ( p  = 0.828). However, the median CHI3L1 level in the TAF group was lower than that in the Control group, with values of 23.8 (19.0, 38.1) ng/mL and 44.8 (33.7, 53.4) ng/mL, respectively ( p  = 0.019). In the TAF and control groups, 22 and 21 patients, respectively, met the low ALT treatment threshold criteria (< 30 U/L for males, < 19 U/L for females). To further evaluate the treatment effect in patients with low inflammation, for whom antiviral therapy is not recommended according to current guidelines, a stratified analysis was performed. The results demonstrated that, at 48 weeks, patients with low ALT treatment thresholds in the TAF group had significantly lower HBV DNA (0 vs. 2.68 log 10  IU/mL,  p  < 0.001) and CHI3L1 levels (26.1 vs. 44.8 ng/mL,  p  = 0.037) compared to the control group, similar to the findings in previous analyses. However, no significant differences were observed between the two groups in HBV pgRNA and HBsAg levels, as detailed in Table  S2 . In the TAF group, 13 patients exhibited a decline in HBsAg from baseline at week 48 of treatment (with a median decrease of 0.06 log 10  IU/mL), while 16 patients showed an increase from baseline (with a median elevation of 0.04 log 10  IU/mL). To investigate potential factors that might influence the HBsAg decline in treated patients, we compared the differences in various indicators between the two subgroups. The results revealed no significant disparities between the patients with HBsAg decline and elevation in terms of age, gender and baseline ALT, AST, ALB, TBIL, GGT, AFP, LSM, HBV DNA, HBV pgRNA, HBsAg levels, as well as ΔHBV DNA and ΔHBV pgRNA during the treatment course. Detailed results are presented in Table  S3 .


DISCUSSION:
In this randomised controlled study, the participants were HBeAg‐negative, had normal ALT levels and exhibited no clinical signs of HCC, cirrhosis, or liver fibrosis. Individuals with a family history of cirrhosis or HCC were excluded. Consequently, this population is not recommended for antiviral therapy according to the AASLD guidelines. No patient who received TAF experienced serious adverse events within 48 weeks. While one patient exhibited a significant increase in CK during treatment, given the history of intense physical activity and the rapid recovery of CK without intervention, it is unlikely that the CK elevation was medication‐related. Post‐treatment, no significant differences were observed between the two groups in biochemical parameters such as ALT, blood lipids and creatinine. Although serum phosphorus was lower in the TAF group, it remained within the normal range. These findings suggest that TAF treatment is safe for HBeAg‐negative patients with normal ALT and no liver fibrosis. In terms of efficacy, this study demonstrated that 48 weeks of TAF treatment did not significantly impact HBsAg clearance or reduction, consistent with the findings of pre‐marketing Phase 3 clinical trials of TAF (Study 108) [ 11 ]. The primary mechanism of action of NAs is the inhibition of viral replication, thereby reducing HBsAg production. Therefore, longer‐term follow‐up is necessary to assess the long‐term impact of TAF treatment on HBsAg. However, HBV DNA levels decreased rapidly following TAF treatment. The treatment group exhibited significantly lower HBV DNA levels compared to the control group from week 12 onwards, with a 100% virological response rate at week 48. This is superior to the efficacy for patients with active CHB. Study 108 included HBeAg‐negative CHB patients with HBV DNA > 2 × 10 4  IU/mL and ALT > 2 × ULN. After 48 weeks of TAF treatment, 94% of them achieved HBV DNA < 29 IU/mL [ 11 ]. This difference may be attributed to the higher baseline HBV DNA levels in the Study 108 population, but it also suggests that for chronic HBV‐infected patients with normal ALT and low viral load, antiviral treatment with NAs can lead to more effective suppression of HBV DNA. Additionally, the response of serum HBV pgRNA was evaluated. Peripheral blood pgRNA may reflect the amount of cccDNA in the liver, and for patients treated with NAs, serum pgRNA may more closely reflect the transcriptional activity of cccDNA [ 12 ,  13 ,  14 ,  15 ]. Our correlation analysis revealed that patients with higher baseline HBV DNA and HBV pgRNA levels, as well as greater reductions in HBV DNA following TAF treatment, also exhibited more significant reductions in pgRNA. This suggests that, with the suppression of HBV DNA by TAF, the transcriptional activity of cccDNA may decrease. Furthermore, previous studies have demonstrated that, during long‐term NAs treatment, patients with high pgRNA levels have a significantly higher risk of developing HCC compared to RNA‐negative patients [ 16 ]. In our study, although there was no significant difference in pgRNA levels between the two groups at week 48, the proportion of pgRNA‐negative patients increased from 41.9% to 51.9% in the TAF group, while in the control group, this rate decreased from 51.9% at baseline to 42.3%. Therefore, we believe that the increased rate of HBV pgRNA negativity following TAF treatment may be beneficial for long‐term patient outcomes. The CHI3L1 gene is highly expressed in liver tissue [ 17 ]. Due to its significant role in the development and progression of liver fibrosis and cirrhosis [ 18 ], CHI3L1 is considered a valuable biomarker for fibrosis, enhancing the accuracy of liver transient elastography diagnostics [ 19 ]. One study, including CHB patients with HBV DNA < 10 3  copies/mL and ALT ≤ 2 × ULN, used liver histology as the gold standard and demonstrated that CHI3L1 is a strong indicator for detecting significant liver fibrosis (≥ S2), with an AUC of 0.94 [ 17 ]. Another study found that after 78 weeks of entecavir treatment in CHB patients, CHI3L1 levels significantly decreased, which paralleled improvements in liver pathology, suggesting that CHI3L1 can not only assess liver fibrosis in hepatitis B patients before treatment but also monitor changes in fibrosis during NA therapy [ 20 ]. In the present study, CHI3L1 levels were lower in the TAF group compared to the control group at week 48. Although both groups had levels below the threshold for significant liver fibrosis, CHI3L1 levels decreased from baseline in the TAF group, while they increased in the control group. This may indicate that TAF antiviral treatment could help delay the progression of liver fibrosis in inactive HBeAg‐negative HBV‐infected patients. The primary limitation of this study is the relatively short follow‐up period. Forty‐eight weeks of antiviral treatment may be insufficient to observe a significant decline in HBsAg levels from baseline, and longer‐term treatment is necessary for further evaluation. To mitigate this limitation, we intend to extend the duration of the study to allow for a more comprehensive evaluation of the long‐term efficacy of the antiviral therapy.


CONCLUSION:
This study showed that TAF was well‐tolerated in HBeAg‐negative patients with normal ALT and low‐level HBV DNA viremia, for whom antiviral treatment is not currently recommended under the AASLD and EASL guidelines. Treatment for 48 weeks led to a high rate of HBV DNA suppression and may potentially delay liver fibrosis progression. Accordingly, early antiviral treatment may benefit this patient population.
