TITLE: Rationale, Design, and Participant Baseline Characteristics of a Parallel Randomized Trial of the Effect of Replacing SSBs with Cow's Milk Versus Soymilk on Intrahepatocellular Lipid and Other Cardiometabolic Risk Factors in Adults with Obesity Who Consume Sugar-Sweetened Beverages: The Soy Treatment Evaluation for Metabolic health (STEM) Trial.

ABSTRACT:
Background/Objectives: Liver fat represents an early metabolic lesion in the development of diabetes and its cardiometabolic complications. Diets high in free sugars, particularly from sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs), are associated with abdominal obesity and increased cardiometabolic risk, prompting global guidelines to limit SSBs as a major public health strategy. Low-fat cow's milk is promoted as the preferred caloric replacement strategy for SSBs due to its high nutritional value and cardiometabolic advantages. Fortified soymilk is a plant-based alternative with approved health claims for cholesterol and coronary heart disease risk reduction that offers an equivalent nutritional value to cow's milk. However, given concerns about its classification as an ultra-processed food (UPF), it is unclear whether soymilk offers comparable metabolic health benefits to milk as part of clinical and public health strategies to reduce SSB intake. The Soy Treatment Evaluation for Metabolic (STEM) health trial seeks to evaluate the impact of replacing SSBs with either 2% soymilk or 2% cow's milk on liver fat and other cardiometabolic risk factors in habitual adult consumers of SSBs with obesity. Methods: The STEM trial is a 24-week, pragmatic, 3-arm, parallel, randomized trial. We recruited adults with obesity (high BMI plus high waist circumference based on ethnic specific cut-offs) consuming ≥1 SSB/day. Participants were randomized to one of three groups based on their usual SSB intake at baseline (servings/day): continued SSB (355 mL can) intake; replacement with fortified, sweetened 2% soymilk (250 mL); or replacement with 2% cow's milk (250 mL). The primary outcome is the change in intrahepatocellular lipid (IHCL) measured by 1H-MRS at 24 weeks. Hierarchical testing will be done to reduce the familywise error rate. The superiority of cow's milk to SSBs will be assessed first to establish assay sensitivity. If superiority is established, then the non-inferiority of soymilk to cow's milk will be assessed using a pre-specified non-inferiority margin of 1.5% IHCL units (assessed by difference of means using a 90% confidence interval [CI]). Analyses will be conducted according to the intention-to-treat (ITT) principle using inverse probability weighting (IPW) for superiority testing and per-protocol analyses for non-inferiority testing, using ANCOVA adjusted for age, sex, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) status, medication use, intervention dose, and baseline levels. We hypothesize that soymilk will be non-inferior to cow's milk (Clinicaltrials.gov NCT05191160). Results: Recruitment began in November 2021. A total of 3050 individuals were screened. We randomized 186 participants (62 per group) between 19 April 2022 and 16 April 2024. Participants are 57% male; with a mean [SD] age of 39.9 [11.8] years; BMI of 34.6 [6.1] kg/m2, waist circumference of 112.6 [13.8] cm; IHCL of 10.0 [8.2] % with 64.1% meeting the criteria for MASLD; and SSBs intake of 2.3 [1.3] servings/day. Conclusions: Baseline characteristics were balanced across the study arms, with participants representing adults with a high-risk metabolic phenotype, and 64.1% meeting the criteria for MASLD. Findings will contribute to evidence on the cardiometabolic benefits of soymilk, informing clinical practice guidelines and public health policy.
