TITLE: Almond Consumption Improves Inflammatory Profiles Independent of Weight Change: A 6-Week Randomized Controlled Trial in Adults with Obesity.

ABSTRACT:
Background: Obesity is characterized by chronic low-grade systemic inflammation that contributes to metabolic dysfunction. Diet is a modifiable factor that can help reduce this inflammation. Nuts such as almonds are rich in unsaturated fats, and antioxidant and anti-inflammatory micronutrients, which may work synergistically to attenuate obesity-related inflammation. Hence, the objective of this study was to investigate whether daily almond consumption improves systemic inflammatory and immune markers in adults with obesity. Methods: In this randomized controlled parallel-arm trial (ClinicalTrials.gov ID NCT05530499), 69 adults (age 30-45 years) with obesity (BMI 30-45 kg/m2) were assigned to consume either 57 g/day of almonds (n = 38) or an isocaloric snack (cookie; n = 31) for six weeks. Fasting serum inflammatory cytokines, innate immune cell counts, body weight, serum glucose, insulin, lipid profile, and alpha-tocopherol were measured at baseline and week six. Dietary intake, compliance, palatability, acceptance, and appetite ratings were also assessed. Primary outcomes were analyzed using linear mixed models and baseline-adjusted linear models. Results: Subjective compliance was high in both groups, with greater acceptance of almonds (p < 0.05); however, serum alpha-tocopherol did not change. Almond consumption significantly decreased serum IL-6, TNF-α, and IFN-γ over 6 weeks compared with the cookie group (p < 0.05). No significant group differences were observed for innate immune cell counts, body weight, appetite ratings, blood pressure, or serum fasting glucose, insulin, total cholesterol (C), LDL-C, and triglycerides over six weeks. The almond group also increased intakes of monounsaturated fat, fiber, alpha-tocopherol, magnesium, zinc, and manganese, and improved diet quality indices relative to the cookie group (p < 0.05). Conclusions: Daily almond consumption for six weeks improved inflammatory cytokine profiles in adults with obesity, without changes in body weight under free-living conditions. These findings support recommending almonds as part of healthy dietary patterns to help attenuate obesity-related inflammation.
