TITLE: Effects of metabolic syndrome on cardiovascular outcomes in non-obese heart failure patients


ABSTRACT:
Abstract Introduction We have previously shown an association between metabolic syndrome (MS) and heart failure (HF) outcomes in patients with implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) or cardiac resynchronization therapy with defibrillator (CRT-D). However, the role of MS in predicting outcomes was not assessed in non-obese patients. We aimed to examine how the presence of MS and its components predicts the risk of HF/death in non-obese ICD or CRT-D patients. Methods We included obese and non-obese patients, enrolled in Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial–Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy (MADIT-CRT). Patients needed at least 2 of the 3 criteria, dyslipidaemia, diabetes, or hypertension, to be considered for having MS. Kaplan–Meier analyses were used to assess the rate of HF/death by MS. Multivariate Cox-proportional analyses were performed to assess the risk of HF/death by MS. Results From 1180 (65%) non-obese patients in MADIT-CRT, 672 (57%) presented with MS. Among non-obese patients with MS, 284 (42%) had diabetes mellitus. Non-obese MS patients had a significantly higher, 34% cumulative probability of HF/death at 3 years, as compared to the 20% of non-obese patients without MS (log-rank  P  < .001) (hazard ratio: 1.64, 95% CI: 1.15–2.32,  P  & .006). Within non-obese MS patients, those with diabetes had a significantly higher rate of HF/death with 28% vs. 20% in non-diabetics at 2.5 years (log-rank  P  < .001). Reverse remodelling was similar in all subgroups. Conclusion MS in non-obese ICD or CRT-D patients is associated with a higher risk of HF/Death, most prominent in those with diabetes, necessitating early intervention.


METHODS:
We included obese and non-obese patients, enrolled in Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial–Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy (MADIT-CRT). Patients needed at least 2 of the 3 criteria, dyslipidaemia, diabetes, or hypertension, to be considered for having MS. Kaplan–Meier analyses were used to assess the rate of HF/death by MS. Multivariate Cox-proportional analyses were performed to assess the risk of HF/death by MS.


RESULTS:
From 1180 (65%) non-obese patients in MADIT-CRT, 672 (57%) presented with MS. Among non-obese patients with MS, 284 (42%) had diabetes mellitus. Non-obese MS patients had a significantly higher, 34% cumulative probability of HF/death at 3 years, as compared to the 20% of non-obese patients without MS (log-rank  P  < .001) (hazard ratio: 1.64, 95% CI: 1.15–2.32,  P  & .006). Within non-obese MS patients, those with diabetes had a significantly higher rate of HF/death with 28% vs. 20% in non-diabetics at 2.5 years (log-rank  P  < .001). Reverse remodelling was similar in all subgroups.


CONCLUSION:
MS in non-obese ICD or CRT-D patients is associated with a higher risk of HF/Death, most prominent in those with diabetes, necessitating early intervention.


METHODS:
The results and the protocol of the MADIT-CRT trial have been previously reported. 8  Patients of either sex who were at least 21 years old, with ischaemic cardiomyopathy (New York Heart Association (NYHA) class I or II) or non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy (NYHA class II only), sinus rhythm, an ejection fraction of 30% or less, and prolonged intraventricular conduction (QRS duration with ≥130 ms) were randomly assigned in 3:2 ratio to receive CRT-D or ICD only. The MADIT-CRT trial was carried out from December 2004 through September 2010, with the primary results published earlier. 8  The MADIT-CRT trial conforms with the principles outlined in the  Declaration of Helsinki  and was approved by the institutional review board of each participating centre, and all patients provided written informed consent. Patients had an ambulatory follow-up 1-month after the device implantation, every 3 months thereafter until the termination of the trial, and every 6 months after the trial. All patients had clinical evaluation at each follow-up visit or at any meaningful clinical event. Data sharing from MADIT-CRT is not available. For this specific analysis, we assessed the cumulative probability and risk of HF or death, whichever came first, among obese and non-obese patients with and without MS. Patients with obesity were defined as body mass index (BMI) ≥30 kg/m 2  at their baseline visit. Patients with MS were defined based on the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) criteria for MS. 9  As stated in the IDF criteria, a BMI ≥ 30 kg/m 2  at baseline was used for the definition of obesity and the treatment for hypertension or baseline systolic blood pressure ≥130 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure ≥85 mm Hg were used to define hypertension. The following modification of the original definition was applied to account for dyslipidaemia: prescription of fibrates, statins, and other lipid-lowering therapy. Diabetes mellitus was reported by the enrolling centres at the time of device implantation, and in this study, served as the marker for hyperglycaemia. Patients were required to have at least two of the following three MS criteria: fibrate or lipid-lowering therapy, diabetes mellitus, or hypertension diagnosis or therapy. 9 The primary endpoint was HF or death (whichever came first). The secondary endpoint was death. The tertiary endpoint was HF alone. The diagnosis of HF was made by physicians at the enrolling centres when patients exhibited signs and symptoms consistent with congestive HF that prompted intravenous decongestive treatment in an outpatient setting or augmented decongestive therapy with oral or parenteral drug administration at the hospital. Adjudication of the endpoints of HF or death was carried out by independent committees who were blinded to treatment assignment, according to pre-specified criteria. Echocardiographic images were recorded according to the pre-specified study protocol at baseline prior to device implantation ( n  & 1809), and 1 year later. Completed paired echocardiographic image sets from baseline and at 1 year with the device turned on were available in 1372 patients (623 patients in the ICD-only group and 749 in the CRT-D group). Echocardiography recordings were analysed offline at the Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts as an independent echocardiography core laboratory. 8  Echocardiography investigators assessing the images were blinded to treatment assignment. Left ventricular (LV) volumes were measured by Simpson’s disk method in the apical 4- and 2-chamber views, and LV ejection fraction (EF) was calculated according to the American Society of Echocardiography protocols. 10  The coefficients of variation for end-diastolic volume, end-systolic volume, and LVEF were 5.2%, 6.2%, and 5.5%, respectively, as reported earlier. 11  In this analysis, we assessed LV end diastolic volume (EDV) percent change, LV end systolic volume (ESV) percent change, and left atrial volume (LAV) percent change from baseline to 1 year in obese and non-obese patients with and without MS. (Groups: obese with MS, obese without MS, non-obese with MS, non-obese without MS). Baseline clinical characteristics were compared between the four groups of patients with or without obesity and with or without MS, and among those with or without MS only, using nonparametric Wilcoxon tests for continuous variables and Chi-square or Fisher tests for dichotomous variables, as appropriate. We performed Kaplan–Meier survival analyses of unadjusted cumulative event rates stratified by the presence or absence obesity and MS using the log-rank test statistics. We estimated hazard ratios for primary and secondary endpoints using the Cox proportional hazards regression method. The independent variables were chosen using the best subsets selection method, which excluded variables not significantly predictive of the endpoints. Final covariates that were used and adjusted for in the models are reported in specific tables. Left ventricular reverse remodelling variables included LVEDV percent change, LVESV percent change, and LAV percent change from baseline to 1 year and were assessed in obese and non-obese patients with or without MS using Wilcoxon test as appropriate. Analyses were carried out with SAS software (version 9.3, SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina).


RESULTS:
The current MADIT-CRT sub-analysis included 1817 patients; among those, 637 (35%) were obese and 1180 (65%) were non-obese. Out of 637 obese patients, 433 (68%) had MS and 204 (32%) did not have MS. Out of 1180 non-obese patients, 672 (57%) had MS and 508 (43%) did not have MS. Among non-obese patients with MS, 284 (42%) had diabetes mellitus. Patients with MS, whether they were obese or non-obese, more often had ischaemic NYHA I and II HF, a prior episode of MI, higher blood urea nitrogen (BUN) level, higher creatinine level, and lower glomerular filtration rate, but had no differences in ICD and CRT-D implantation rates at their baseline ( Table 1 ). Baseline clinical characteristics P -values less than 0.05 are in bold. a Values are given as total number of patients and percentage or mean ± SD. Among patients with an ICD-only, there was a higher cumulative probability of HF or death events amongst obese and non-obese patients with MS ( Figure 1A ), with a 3-year cumulative probability of 34% for both groups, while patients with no MS had lower rates of HF death, with a 3-year cumulative probability of 19% for obese and 20% for non-obese patients ( P  log-rank <.001). Similar findings were noted for HF only, non-obese and obese patients with MS exhibited a similar rate of events (31% vs. 32% at 3 years), while the non-obese and obese patients without MS had significantly lower rates (16% vs. 18%, log rank  P  = .001) ( Figure 1B ). In contrast, there were no significant differences in the cumulative probability of ventricular tachycardia (VT)/VF or death and VT/VF across the four subgroups ( Figure 1C  and  D ). Multivariate analyses confirmed that the risk of HF/death was higher for patients who had MS compared to patients who did not have MS with a hazard ratio of 1.63,  P  = .011, for obese patients with MS, and a hazard ratio of 1.64,  P  = .006 for non-obese patients with MS ( Table 2 ). The risk for HF was similarly increased in patients with MS. However, there were no differences between the risk of ventricular tachyarrhythmia events across the four subgroups ( Table 2 ). Cumulative probability of implantable cardioverter defibrillator outcomes by obesity and metabolic syndrome status. This figure describes the rates of ( A ) heart failure/death, ( B ) heart failure, ( C ) ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation, ( D ) ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation/death of implantable cardioverter defibrillator patients who are obese with metabolic syndrome, non-obese with metabolic syndrome, obese without metabolic syndrome, or non-obese without metabolic syndrome Multivariate cox regression models on heart failure/death, heart failure, ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation/death in implantable cardioverter defibrillator only patients with/without metabolic syndrome Reference group that was compared is non-obese without metabolic syndrome. a The multivariate models were adjusted for age greater or equal to 65 years, creatinine value at baseline, smoking status at baseline, diastolic blood pressure at baseline, heart rate greater or equal to 80 bpm, and prior hospitalization at baseline. Next, we analysed the clinical benefit of the non-obese patients by MS status and found a lower cumulative probability of HF only and HF/Death events in patients randomized to CRT-D as compared to an ICD-only, whether or not they had MS ( Figure 2A  and  B ), while the absolute risk reduction was greater for patients with MS (12%) compared to those without MS (4%). Multivariate analyses among non-obese patients revealed that CRT-D was associated with a significantly lower risk of HF/Death, HF, VT/VF/Death, and VT/VF in patients with or without MS, if they exhibited left bundle branch block (LBBB). Patients with non-LBBB did not benefit from CRT-D implantation, compared to treatment with ICD-only ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Cumulative probability of heart failure/death from implantable cardioverter defibrillator and cardiac resynchronization therapy with defibrillator in non-obese. This figure describes the rates of heart failure/death in the treatment groups of implantable cardioverter defibrillator and cardiac resynchronization therapy with defibrillator subjects in ( A ) non-obese patients with metabolic syndrome and ( B ) non-obese patients without metabolic syndrome over a period of 2.5 years Surprisingly, the magnitude of CRT-D induced LV remodelling was similar across the subgroups of patients, obese with MS, obese without MS, non-obese with MS, and non-obese without MS, with comparable changes in LVEDV, LVESV, or LAV change from baseline to 1 year ( Supplementary Figure S1 ). Non-obese patients with MS were stratified based on the diagnosis of diabetes, hypertension, and/or dyslipidaemia ( Supplementary Table S2 ). The presence of diabetes in non-obese patients with MS increased the 2.5-year cumulative probability of HF/Death compared to non-obese patients without diabetes (28% vs 20%, log rank  P  < .001) ( Figure 3A ), but not for hypertension (23% vs 32%, log rank  P  < .001) or dyslipidaemia (23% vs 23%, log rank  P  < .001). ( Figure 3B  and  C ). Multivariate analysis supported that diabetes significantly increased the risk of HF (hazard ratio & 1.82,  P  < .001) and HF/Death events (hazard ratio & 1.87,  P  < .001,  Table 3 ). Patients with hypertension alone had an increased risk of HF/death (hazard ratio = 1.74,  P  = .032) and HF alone (Hazard Ratio = 2.22,  P  = .008). This risk was further increased when both hypertension and diabetes were present, suggesting an additive effect of hypertension and diabetes for the risks of both, HF or death (hazard ratio = 2.75, <.001) and HF alone (hazard ratio = 3.38,  P  < .001) ( Table 3 ). Cumulative probability of heart failure/death by metabolic syndrome components in non-obese patients. This figure shows the cumulative probability of heart failure/death in non-obese patients with metabolic syndrome only ( A ) with or without diabetes, ( B ) with or without hypertension, and ( C ) with or without dyslipidaemia (each component of metabolic syndrome) as compared to non-obese patients with no metabolic syndrome Multivariate analysis of metabolic syndrome components and association to heart failure/death and ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation/death in non-obese with implantable cardioverter defibrillator and cardiac resynchronization therapy with defibrillator Reference group that was compared is non-obese without metabolic syndrome. The multivariate models were adjusted for age greater than or equal to 65 years, creatinine value at baseline, smoking status at baseline, diastolic blood pressure at baseline, heart rate greater than or equal to 80 bpm, and prior hospitalization at baseline. When non-obese patients were further stratified based on their BMI categorization of normal weight (BMI <25 kg/m 2 ) and overweight (BMI 25–29.9 kg/m 2 ), patients with normal weight and MS had a higher 2.5-year cumulative probability of HF/Death from ICD and CRT-D implantation compared to patients with overweight status and MS (28% vs 21%, log rank  P  < .001) ( Supplementary Figure S2 ).


HF OUTCOMES OBESITY STATUS AND METABOLIC SYNDROME IN ICD PATIENTS:
Among patients with an ICD-only, there was a higher cumulative probability of HF or death events amongst obese and non-obese patients with MS ( Figure 1A ), with a 3-year cumulative probability of 34% for both groups, while patients with no MS had lower rates of HF death, with a 3-year cumulative probability of 19% for obese and 20% for non-obese patients ( P  log-rank <.001). Similar findings were noted for HF only, non-obese and obese patients with MS exhibited a similar rate of events (31% vs. 32% at 3 years), while the non-obese and obese patients without MS had significantly lower rates (16% vs. 18%, log rank  P  = .001) ( Figure 1B ). In contrast, there were no significant differences in the cumulative probability of ventricular tachycardia (VT)/VF or death and VT/VF across the four subgroups ( Figure 1C  and  D ). Multivariate analyses confirmed that the risk of HF/death was higher for patients who had MS compared to patients who did not have MS with a hazard ratio of 1.63,  P  = .011, for obese patients with MS, and a hazard ratio of 1.64,  P  = .006 for non-obese patients with MS ( Table 2 ). The risk for HF was similarly increased in patients with MS. However, there were no differences between the risk of ventricular tachyarrhythmia events across the four subgroups ( Table 2 ). Cumulative probability of implantable cardioverter defibrillator outcomes by obesity and metabolic syndrome status. This figure describes the rates of ( A ) heart failure/death, ( B ) heart failure, ( C ) ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation, ( D ) ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation/death of implantable cardioverter defibrillator patients who are obese with metabolic syndrome, non-obese with metabolic syndrome, obese without metabolic syndrome, or non-obese without metabolic syndrome Multivariate cox regression models on heart failure/death, heart failure, ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation/death in implantable cardioverter defibrillator only patients with/without metabolic syndrome Reference group that was compared is non-obese without metabolic syndrome. a The multivariate models were adjusted for age greater or equal to 65 years, creatinine value at baseline, smoking status at baseline, diastolic blood pressure at baseline, heart rate greater or equal to 80 bpm, and prior hospitalization at baseline.


THE RELATIVE CONTRIBUTION OF THE DIFFERENT FACTORS OF METABOLIC SYNDROME TO ADVERSE OUTCOMES AMONG NON-OBESE PATIENTS:
Non-obese patients with MS were stratified based on the diagnosis of diabetes, hypertension, and/or dyslipidaemia ( Supplementary Table S2 ). The presence of diabetes in non-obese patients with MS increased the 2.5-year cumulative probability of HF/Death compared to non-obese patients without diabetes (28% vs 20%, log rank  P  < .001) ( Figure 3A ), but not for hypertension (23% vs 32%, log rank  P  < .001) or dyslipidaemia (23% vs 23%, log rank  P  < .001). ( Figure 3B  and  C ). Multivariate analysis supported that diabetes significantly increased the risk of HF (hazard ratio & 1.82,  P  < .001) and HF/Death events (hazard ratio & 1.87,  P  < .001,  Table 3 ). Patients with hypertension alone had an increased risk of HF/death (hazard ratio = 1.74,  P  = .032) and HF alone (Hazard Ratio = 2.22,  P  = .008). This risk was further increased when both hypertension and diabetes were present, suggesting an additive effect of hypertension and diabetes for the risks of both, HF or death (hazard ratio = 2.75, <.001) and HF alone (hazard ratio = 3.38,  P  < .001) ( Table 3 ). Cumulative probability of heart failure/death by metabolic syndrome components in non-obese patients. This figure shows the cumulative probability of heart failure/death in non-obese patients with metabolic syndrome only ( A ) with or without diabetes, ( B ) with or without hypertension, and ( C ) with or without dyslipidaemia (each component of metabolic syndrome) as compared to non-obese patients with no metabolic syndrome Multivariate analysis of metabolic syndrome components and association to heart failure/death and ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation/death in non-obese with implantable cardioverter defibrillator and cardiac resynchronization therapy with defibrillator Reference group that was compared is non-obese without metabolic syndrome. The multivariate models were adjusted for age greater than or equal to 65 years, creatinine value at baseline, smoking status at baseline, diastolic blood pressure at baseline, heart rate greater than or equal to 80 bpm, and prior hospitalization at baseline.


DISCUSSION:
In this sub-analysis of MADIT-CRT, we found that MS is longitudinally associated with an increased risk of HF/Death in ICD recipients, independent of obesity status. The implantation of CRT-D resulted in a significant clinical benefit in non-obese patients with or without MS, albeit only in patients with the LBBB ECG pattern. Moreover, the presence of diabetes and/or hypertension resulted in significantly higher risks of HF/death among non-obese patients, with patients who had both diabetes and hypertension, being at the highest risk for the above adverse cardiac outcomes ( Graphical Abstract ). These results support the notion that diabetes and hypertension are major contributors to adverse outcomes in patients with ICD and CRT-D implantation. HF progression and hypertension appear to be additive to the deleterious effects of diabetes in this cohort. The above concept aligns well with the results of recent clinical trials demonstrating that sodium-glucose-cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, agents which improve glucose and blood pressure control, and also volume overload, reduce the risk of HF hospitalizations and CV mortality in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF; EF ≥ 50%) and heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF; EF < 40%) even without significant weight loss. 12 , 13 Weight loss in general, which improves glucose, blood pressure control, dyslipidaemia as well as LV function has been shown to reduce progression and symptoms of HF. 14 , 15  For example, the SELECT trial showed that semaglutide, a glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (GLP1R) agonist, reduced the risk for CV and composite HF outcomes in overweight or obese patients without diabetes (the majority of patients had prediabetes), supporting the benefits of all, diabetes prevention, blood pressure, and weight control. 16 , 17  On the other hand, a lower BMI is not always beneficial. In the STABILITY sub-study, treatment with darapladib, a lipoprotein phospholipase A2 inhibitor, for atherosclerosis resulted in an increased risk of cardiovascular mortality among underweight individuals with BMI <20 kg/m 2  and high BMI of ≥35 kg/m 2 . 18  Moreover, the sub-study of MADIT-CRT highlighted that weight loss is associated with adverse clinical outcomes from CRT, especially in patients with LBBB. 19  Although the weight loss after CRT implantation may predict adverse CV outcomes, it is unknown whether the difference in BMI before CRT implantation is related to the difference in the clinical outcome. However, given that physical exercise has been known to mitigate metabolic risk even in the absence of weight change, it may be beneficial to recommend a moderate level of exercise without weight reduction among HF patients with MS. 20–22 Our study noted that, regardless of obesity status, the presence of MS increases the risk of HF/Death. That said, among non-obese patients, a BMI of <25 kg/m 2  in patients with MS conveyed a higher risk of HF/Death from ICD or CRT-D implantation. The latter finding suggests that although weight loss may be important in the management of HF in obese patients, weight loss may not be beneficial for overweight patients with MS. One caveat to note is that BMI may not be an accurate measurement as it fails to accurately measure fat distribution and contribution. A recent substudy of PARADIGM-HF has highlighted that ‘obesity-survival paradox’, which relates to a lower mortality risk in HFrEF patients with BMI ≥25 kg/m 2 , was absent when indices that include waist circumference and height, but not weight, were used to assess HF outcomes. 23  However, given that the study is part of a trial involved assessing efficacy and safety of sacubitril/valsartan compared to enalapril and that a limited number of patients had ICD or CRT-D, it is difficult to assess whether the new indices would mitigate beneficial aspects of being overweight in the setting of ICD or CRT-D implantation. We also found that the risk of HF/Death is higher among non-obese patients with diabetes who also have hypertension compared to non-obese patients with diabetes alone. This result emphasized the importance of blood pressure management to minimize the cardiac risk among non-obese patients with diabetes. Hypertension and diabetes are well-known comorbidities associated with CVDs. The importance of blood pressure control in patients with diabetes is highlighted in the recent BPROAD study: intensive systolic blood pressure control below 120 mmHg in patients with type 2 diabetes significantly lowered the cardiovascular events rate including MI, stroke, treatment or hospitalization for HF, or death from CVDs. 24  Thus, the strict management of hypertension may be beneficial for non-obese patients with MS to optimize cardiovascular risk and reduce complications from implantable devices. A key contributor that is present in both obesity and MS that drives HF pathogenesis is inflammation. It is known that obesity and MS, especially diabetes, create chronic low-grade inflammation, which contributes to worsening HF. 25  Although most publications emphasize a greater correlation of inflammation to HFpEF, it should be noted that inflammatory processes also play a significant role in HFrEF as well. A key biomarker that is used for assessing systemic inflammation is C-reactive protein (hsCRP), which has been associated to greater disease severity in HFpEF and HFrEF patients. 25  Recent trials with GLP1R and glucose-dependent Insulinotrophic polypeptide (GIP) agonists and SGLT2 inhibitors provide insight towards the role of cardiac inflammation in worsening HF outcomes among patients with diabetes or obesity, including the SUMMIT trial with the novel GLP1R and GIP agonists Tirzepatide which suggested beneficial effects within very short time after initiation, where no substantial weight loss is present 26 , 27  Therefore, it is important to note that reduction in inflammation may have beneficial effects in preventing diabetes or obesiy-driven HF pathogenesis. Moreover, SGLT2 inhibitors like empagliflozin, canagliflozin, and dapagliflozin have been shown to reduce the inflammatory profile in patients with diabetes with a key mechanism of inhibiting the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain, leucine-rich repeat-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, which is a key molecular in regulating downstream inflammatory cytokines. 28 Another factor that is known to exacerbate cardiac conduction abnormalities from MS is epicardial adipose tissue (EAT). Increased amount of EAT has been associated with cardiac arrhythmogenesis and is known to exacerbate atrial fibrillation. 29  It is important to note that an increased BMI and MS is associated with increased EAT. 29  Adipose tissue is known to secrete a variety of pro-inflammatory cytokines and is correlated with adverse cardiac remodelling, which also suggests the role of EATs in regulating the inflammatory pathways of HF progression. 29  Moreover, empagliflozin significantly reduced the EAT level alongside reducing inflammatory markers and interstitial fibrosis. 30  Given the above associations between EAT and cardiac arrhythmogenesis and inflammation, both BMI and/or diabetes likely shape clinical outcomes from electrophysiological interventions like CRT or ICD. Although this study did not assess EAT and its association with adverse outcomes from ICD and CRT-D implantation, the association of diabetes or obesity with adverse outcomes supports a mechanistic role of EAT in HF progression. Finally, cardiac bioenergetics and metabolism are relevant for HF progression. Impaired cardiac metabolism has been found to be the major driver of HF progression, and diabetes is a strong contributor to impaired cardiac metabolism and insulin resistance. 31 , 32  Previous studies have highlighted the role of impaired cardiac mitochondrial metabolism in the progression of HF and how the restoration of mitochondrial function prevents the HF progression. 33 , 34  As an example, SGLT2 inhibitors restore mitochondrial health and biogenesis and prevent cellular damage and HF progression. 35  Furthermore, metabolomics studies of blood from patients with HFpEF or HFrEF showed that despite markedly higher presence of obesity and diabetes in HFpEF patients, there were lower fatty acid metabolites and ketone and TCA cycle activation, indicating that there may be inefficient fuel usage among patients with HF. 36 , 37  Further investigations of the role of cardiac bioenergetics and metabolism are needed to identify additional risk factors and/or new treatment targets for patients with MS, especially for non-obese patients with diabetes. Several limitations of this study should be noted. First, our study is limited to patients with ICD and CRT-D patients which may limit the generalizability to the general HFrEF patients. However, given that ICD and CRT-D are widely used among HFrEF, our study will be beneficial in guiding management of MS in HFrEF patients with implantable devices. Second, our study did not record haemoglobin A1c levels, thus the effects of glycemic control over time cannot be judged. Moreover, we did not obtain lipid profiles of the patients studied here which limit conclusions with respect to specific lipoprotein fractions and lipid profiles typically associated with MS (low high-density lipoprotein, elevated triglyceride levels). Given that the status of dyslipidaemia was determined based on statin and lipid-lowering treatment, it may be associated with reduced inflammatory status in HF, 22  which may limit any deleterious effects that hyperlipidaemia may have in HF outcomes. Alongside quantitative evaluation of lipids, the utilization of BMI may overlook key insights related to visceral adiposity or fat distribution as demonstrated in a substudy of PARADIGM-HF. 23  Also, the MADIT-CRT trial did not assess inflammatory markers such as hsCRP, which is also a key biomarker of HF progression. Finally, some of the subgroups had only a small number of patients, which limits the statistical power of the conclusions to be drawn, especially related to patients with hypertension or dyslipidaemia. Future studies with a larger number of patients are warranted to confirm these findings.


CONCLUSIONS:
In this large, multi-centre MADIT-CRT sub-study analysis, we show that non-obese patients with MS are at a high risk of HF or death, similar to obese patients with MS. Furthermore, the presence of diabetes and a normal weight status (BMI <25 kg/m 2 ) in non-obese patients was associated with an increased risk of HF/Death. If confirmed in future studies, these results support the importance of intensive management of each component of MS among non-obese HF patients.
